<div><h1 id='chap01'>CHAPTER I</h1></div>

<h3>Storm</h3>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager Williams stood in her doorway and looked out
at the sun. The western sky was a sulphurous yellow and the
sun a red ball dropping slowly behind the trees and housetops.
Its setting left the rest of the heavens grey with clouds.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Huh! A storm’s comin’,” said Aunt Hager aloud.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A pullet ran across the back yard and into a square-cut
hole in an unpainted piano-box which served as the roosting-house.
An old hen clucked her brood together and, with
the tiny chicks, went into a small box beside the large one.
The air was very still. Not a leaf stirred on the green apple-tree.
Not a single closed flower of the morning-glories
trembled on the back fence. The air was very still and yellow.
Something sultry and oppressive made a small boy in
the doorway stand closer to his grandmother, clutching her
apron with his brown hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sho is a storm comin’,” said Aunt Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope mama gets home ’fore it rains,” remarked the
brown child holding to the old woman’s apron. “Hope she
gets home.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I does, too,” said Aunt Hager. “But I’s skeared she
won’t.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Just then great drops of water began to fall heavily into
the back yard, pounding up little clouds of dust where each
drop struck the earth. For a few moments they pattered violently
on the roof like a series of hammer-strokes; then suddenly
they ceased.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come in, chile,” said Aunt Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She closed the door as the green apple-tree began to sway
in the wind and a small hard apple fell, rolling rapidly down
the top of the piano-box that sheltered the chickens. Inside
the kitchen it was almost dark. While Aunt Hager lighted an
oil-lamp, the child climbed to a chair and peered through
the square window into the yard. The leaves and flowers of
the morning-glory vines on the back fence were bending
with the rising wind. And across the alley at the big house,
Mrs. Kennedy’s rear screen-door banged to and fro, and
Sandy saw her garbage-pail suddenly tip over and roll down
into the yard, scattering potato-peelings on the white steps.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sho gwine be a terrible storm,” said Hager as she turned
up the wick of the light and put the chimney on. Then,
glancing through the window, she saw a black cloud twisting
like a ribbon in the western sky, and the old woman
screamed aloud in sudden terror: “It’s a cyclone! It’s gwine
be a cyclone! Sandy, let’s get over to Mis’ Carter’s quick,
’cause we ain’t got no cellar here. Come on, chile, let’s get!
Come on, chile! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Come on, chile!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hurriedly she blew out the light, grabbed the boy’s hand;
and together they rushed through the little house towards
the front. It was quite dark in the inner rooms, but through
the parlor windows came a sort of sooty grey-green light
that was rapidly turning to blackness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawd help us, Jesus!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager opened the front door, but before she or the
child could move, a great roaring sound suddenly shook the
world, and, with a deafening division of wood from wood,
they saw their front porch rise into the air and go hurtling
off into space. Sailing high in the gathering darkness, the
porch was soon lost to sight. And the black wind blew with
terrific force, numbing the ear-drums.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a moment the little house trembled and swayed and
creaked as though it were about to fall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Help me to shut this do’,” Aunt Hager screamed; “help
me to shut it, Lawd!” as with all her might she struggled
against the open door, which the wind held back, but finally
it closed and the lock caught. Then she sank to the floor
with her back against the wall, while her small grandson
trembled like a leaf as she took him in her lap, mumbling:
“What a storm! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O, Lawdy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O, ma chile, what a
storm!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They could hear the crackling of timbers and the rolling
limbs of trees that the wind swept across the roof. Her arms
tightened about the boy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dear Jesus!” she said. “I wonder where is yo’ mama?
S’pose she started out fo’ home ’fore this storm come up!”
Then in a scream: “Have mercy on ma Annjee! O, Lawd,
have mercy on this chile’s mama! Have mercy on all ma
chillens! Ma Harriett, an’ ma Tempy, an’ ma Annjee, what’s
maybe all of ’em out in de storm! O, Lawd!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A dry crack of lightning split the darkness, and the boy
began to wail. Then the rain broke. The old woman could
not see the crying child she held, nor could the boy hear the
broken voice of his grandmother, who had begun to pray as
the rain crashed through the inky blackness. For a long
while it roared on the roof of the house and pounded at the
windows, until finally the two within became silent, hushing
their cries. Then only the lashing noise of the water,
coupled with the feeling that something terrible was happening,
or had already happened, filled the evening air.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>After the rain the moon rose clear and bright and the
clouds disappeared from the lately troubled sky. The stars
sparkled calmly above the havoc of the storm, and it was still
early evening as people emerged from their houses and began
to investigate the damage brought by the twisting cyclone
that had come with the sunset. Through the
rubbish-filled streets men drove slowly with horse and
buggy or automobile. The fire-engine was out, banging
away, and the soft tang-tang-tang of the motor ambulance
could be heard in the distance carrying off the injured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Black Aunt Hager and her brown grandson put their rubbers
on and stood in the water-soaked front yard looking at
the porchless house where they lived. Platform, steps, pillars,
roof, and all had been blown away. Not a semblance of
a porch was left and the front door opened bare into the
yard. It was grotesque and funny. Hager laughed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Cyclone sho did a good job,” she said. “Looks like I ain’t
never had no porch.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Madam de Carter, from next door, came across the grass,
her large mouth full of chattering sympathy for her neighbor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But praise God for sparing our lives! It might’ve been
worse, Sister Williams! It might’ve been much more calamitouser!
As it is, I lost nothin’ more’n a chimney and two
wash-tubs which was settin’ in the back yard. A few trees
broke down don’t ’mount to nothin’. We’s livin’, ain’t we?
And we’s more importanter than trees is any day!” Her gold
teeth sparkled in the moonlight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Deed so,” agreed Hager emphatically. “Let’s move on
down de block, Sister, an’ see what mo’ de Lawd has ’stroyed
or spared this evenin’. He’s gin us plenty moonlight after de
storm so we po’ humans can see this lesson o’ His’n to a sinful
world.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two elderly colored women picked their way about
on the wet walk, littered with twigs and branches of broken
foliage. The little brown boy followed, with his eyes wide at
the sight of baby-carriages, window-sashes, shingles, and
tree-limbs scattered about in the roadway. Large numbers
of people were out, some standing on porches, some carrying
lanterns, picking up useful articles from the streets,
some wringing their hands in a daze.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Near the corner a small crowd had gathered quietly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mis’ Gavitt’s killed,” somebody said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawd help!” burst from Aunt Hager and Madam de
Carter simultaneously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mister and Mis’ Gavitt’s both dead,” added a nervous
young white man, bursting with the news. “We live next
door to ’em, and their house turned clean over! Came near
hitting us and breaking our side-wall in.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Have mercy!” said the two women, but Sandy slipped
away from his grandmother and pushed through the crowd.
He ran round the corner to where he could see the overturned
house of the unfortunate Gavitts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Good white folks, the Gavitts, Aunt Hager had often
said, and now their large frame dwelling lay on its side like a
doll’s mansion, with broken furniture strewn carelessly on
the wet lawn—and they were dead. Sandy saw a piano flat
on its back in the grass. Its ivory keys gleamed in the moonlight
like grinning teeth, and the strange sight made his little
body shiver, so he hurried back through the crowd
looking for his grandmother. As he passed the corner, he
heard a woman sobbing hysterically within the wide house
there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His grandmother was no longer standing where he had
left her, but he found Madam de Carter and took hold of
her hand. She was in the midst of a group of excited white
and colored women. One frail old lady was saying in a high
determined voice that she had never seen a cyclone like this
in her whole life, and she had lived here in Kansas, if you
please, going on seventy-three years. Madam de Carter,
chattering nervously, began to tell them how she had recognized
its coming and had rushed to the cellar the minute
she saw the sky turn green. She had not come up until the
rain stopped, so frightened had she been. She was extravagantly
enjoying the telling of her fears as Sandy kept tugging
at her hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where’s my grandma?” he demanded. Madam de
Carter, however, did not cease talking to answer his question.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you want, sonny?” finally one of the white
women asked, bending down when he looked as if he were
about to cry. “Aunt Hager? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Why, she’s inside helping
them calm poor Mrs. Gavitt’s niece. Your grandmother’s
good to have around when folks are sick or grieving, you
know. Run and set on the steps like a nice boy and wait until
she comes out.” So Sandy left the women and went to sit in
the dark on the steps of the big corner house where the
niece of the dead Mrs. Gavitt lived. There were some people
on the porch, but they soon passed through the screen-door
into the house or went away down the street. The
moonlight cast weird shadows across the damp steps where
Sandy sat, and it was dark there under the trees in spite of
the moon, for the old house was built far back from the
street in a yard full of oaks and maples, and Sandy could see
the light from an upstairs window reflecting on the wet
leaves of their nearest boughs. He heard a girl screaming,
too, up there where the light was burning, and he knew that
Aunt Hager was putting cold cloths on her head, or rubbing
her hands, or driving folks out of the room, and talking kind
to her so that she would soon be better.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the neighborhood, white or colored, called his grandmother
when something happened. She was a good nurse,
they said, and sick folks liked her around. Aunt Hager always
came when they called, too, bringing maybe a little
soup that she had made or a jelly. Sometimes they paid her
and sometimes they didn’t. But Sandy had never had to sit
outdoors in the darkness waiting for her before. He leaned
his small back against the top step and rested his elbows on
the porch behind him. It was growing late and the people in
the streets had all disappeared.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There, in the dark, the little fellow began to think about
his mother, who worked on the other side of town for a rich
white lady named Mrs. J. J. Rice. And suddenly frightful
thoughts came into his mind. Suppose she had left for home
just as the storm came up! Almost always his mother was
home before dark—but she wasn’t there tonight when the
storm came—and she should have been home! This
thought appalled him. She should have been there! But
maybe she had been caught by the storm and blown away as
she walked down Main Street! Maybe Annjee had been carried
off by the great black wind that had overturned the
Gavitts’ house and taken his grandma’s porch flying
through the air! Maybe the cyclone had gotten his mother,
Sandy thought. He wanted her! Where was she? Had something
terrible happened to her? Where was she now?</p>

<p class='pindent'>The big tears began to roll down his cheeks—but the little
fellow held back the sobs that wanted to come. He decided
he wasn’t going to cry and make a racket there by
himself on the strange steps of these white folks’ house. He
wasn’t going to cry like a big baby in the dark. So he wiped
his eyes, kicked his heels against the cement walk, lay down
on the top step, and, by and by, sniffled himself to sleep.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>“Wake up, son!” Someone was shaking him. “You’ll catch
your death o’ cold sleeping on the wet steps like this. We’re
going home now. Don’t want me to have to carry a big man
like you, do you, boy? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Wake up, Sandy!” His mother
stooped to lift his long little body from the wide steps. She
held him against her soft heavy breasts and let his head rest
on one of her shoulders while his feet, in their muddy rubbers,
hung down against her dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where you been, mama?” the boy asked drowsily, tightening
his arms about her neck. “I been waiting for you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I been home a long time, worried to death about
you and ma till I heard from Madam Carter that you-all was
down here nursing the sick. I stopped at your Aunt Tempy’s
house when I seen the storm coming.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was afraid you got blowed away, mama,” murmured
Sandy sleepily. “Let’s go home, mama. I’m glad you ain’t got
blowed away.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>On the porch Aunt Hager was talking to a pale white man
and two thin white women standing at the door of the
lighted hallway. “Just let Mis’ Agnes sleep,” she was saying.
“She’ll be all right now, an’ I’ll come back in de mawnin’ to
see ’bout her.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Good-night, you-all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old colored woman joined her daughter and they
started home, walking through the streets filled with debris
and puddles of muddy water reflecting the moon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re certainly heavy, boy,” remarked Sandy’s mother
to the child she held, but he didn’t answer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m right glad you come for me, Annjee,” Hager said. “I
wonder is yo’ sister all right out yonder at de country
club.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ I was so worried ’bout you I didn’t know what
to do—skeared you might a got caught in this twister, ’cause
it were cert’ly awful!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was at Tempy’s!” Annjee replied. “And I was nearly
crazy, but I just left everything in the hands o’ God. That’s
all.” In silence they walked on, a piece; then hesitantly, to
her mother: “There wasn’t any mail for me today, was there,
ma?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not a speck!” the old woman replied shortly. “Mail-man
passed on by.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a few minutes there was silence again as they walked.
Then, “It’s goin’ on three weeks he’s been gone, and he ain’t
written a line,” the younger woman complained, shifting
the child to her right arm. “Seems like Jimboy would let a
body know where he is, ma, wouldn’t it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Huh! That ain’t nothin’! He’s been gone before this an’
he ain’t wrote, ain’t he? Here you is worryin’ ’bout a letter
from that good-for-nothing husband o’ your’n—an’ there’s
ma house settin’ up without a porch to its name! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Ain’t
you seed what de devil’s done done on earth this evenin’,
chile? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ yet de first thing you ask me ’bout is de mail-man! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Lawd! Lawd! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You an’ that Jimboy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager lifted her heavy body over fallen tree-trunks
and across puddles, but between puffs she managed to voice
her indignation, so Annjee said no more concerning letters
from her husband. Instead they went back to the subject of
the cyclone. “I’m just thankful, ma, it didn’t blow the whole
house down and you with it, that’s all! I was certainly worried!
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And then you-all was gone when I got home!
Gone on out—nursing that white woman.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It’s too bad
’bout poor Mis’ Gavitt, though, and old man Gavitt, ain’t
it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, indeedy!” said Aunt Hager. “It’s sho too bad. They
was certainly good old white folks! An’ her married niece is
takin’ it mighty hard, po’ little soul. I was nigh two hours,
her husband an’ me, tryin’ to bring her out o’ de hysterics.
Tremblin’ like a lamb all over, she was.” They were turning
into the yard. “Be careful with that chile, Annjee, you don’t
trip on none o’ them boards nor branches an’ fall with him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Put me down, ’cause I’m awake,” said Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old house looked queer without a porch. In the
moonlight he could see the long nails that had held the
porch roof to the weather-boarding. His grandmother
climbed slowly over the door-sill, and his mother lifted him
to the floor level as Aunt Hager lit the large oil-lamp on the
parlor table. Then they went back to the bedroom, where
the youngster took off his clothes, said his prayers, and
climbed into the high feather bed where he slept with Annjee.
Aunt Hager went to the next room, but for a long time
she talked back and forth through the doorway to her
daughter about the storm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We was just startin’ out fo’ Mis’ Carter’s cellar, me an’
Sandy,” she said several times. “But de Lawd was with us!
He held us back! Praise His name! We ain’t harmed, none
of us—’ceptin’ I don’t know ’bout ma Harriett at de club.
But you’s all right. An’ you say Tempy’s all right, too. An’ I
prays that Harriett ain’t been touched out there in de country
where she’s workin’. Maybe de storm ain’t passed that
way.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then they spoke about the white people where Annjee
worked .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and about the elder sister Tempy’s prosperity.
Then Sandy heard his grandmother climb into bed, and a
few minutes after the springs screaked under her, she had
begun to snore. Annjee closed the door between their
rooms and slowly began to unlace her wet shoes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sandy,” she whispered, “we ain’t had no word yet from
your father since he left. I know he goes away and stays
away like this and don’t write, but I’m sure worried. Hope
the cyclone ain’t passed nowhere near wherever he is, and I
hope ain’t nothin’ hurt him.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m gonna pray for him,
Sandy. I’m gonna ask God right now to take care o’
Jimboy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The Lawd knows, I wants him to come
back! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I loves him.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. We both loves him, don’t we,
child? And we want him to come on back!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She knelt down beside the bed in her night-dress and
kept her head bowed for a long time. Before she got up,
Sandy had gone to sleep.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap02'>CHAPTER II</h1></div>

<h3>Conversation</h3>

<p class='pindent'>It was broad daylight in the town of Stanton and had been
for a long time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Get out o’ that bed, boy!” Aunt Hager yelled. “Here’s
Buster waitin’ out in de yard to play with you, an’ you still
sleepin’!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, tell him to cut off his curls,” retorted Sandy, but his
grandmother was in no mood for fooling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stop talkin’ ’bout that chile’s haid and put yo’ clothes on.
Nine o’clock an’ you ain’t up yet! Shame on you!” She
shouted from the kitchen, where Sandy could hear the fire
crackling and smell coffee boiling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He kicked the sheet off with his bare feet and rolled over
and over on the soft feather tick. There was plenty of room
to roll now, because his mother had long since got up and
gone to Mrs. J. J. Rice’s to work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tell Bus I’m coming,” Sandy yelled, jumping into his
trousers and running with bare feet towards the door. “Is he
got his marbles?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come back here, sir, an’ put them shoes on,” cried
Hager, stopping him on his way out. “Yo’ feet’ll get long as
yard-sticks and flat as pancakes runnin’ round barefooted
all de time. An’ wash yo’ face, sir. Buster ain’t got a thing to
do but wait. An’ eat yo’ breakfast.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The air was warm with sunlight, and hundreds of purple
and white morning-glories laughed on the back fence.
Earth and sky were fresh and clean after the heavy night-rain,
and the young corn-shoots stood straight in the garden,
and green pea-vines wound themselves around their
crooked sticks. There was the mingled scent of wet soil and
golden pollen on the breeze that blew carelessly through
the clear air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Buster sat under the green apple-tree with a pile of black
mud from the alley in front of him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hey, Sandy, gonna make marbles and put ’em in the sun
to dry,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right,” agreed Sandy, and they began to roll mud
balls in the palms of their hands. But instead of putting
them in the sun to dry they threw them against the back of
the house, where they flattened and stuck beautifully. Then
they began to throw them at each other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy’s playmate was a small ivory-white Negro child
with straight golden hair, which his mother made him wear
in curls. His eyes were blue and doll-like and he in no way
resembled a colored youngster; but he was colored. Sandy
himself was the shade of a nicely browned piece of toast,
with dark, brown-black eyes and a head of rather kinky,
sandy hair that would lie smooth only after a rigorous application
of vaseline and water. That was why folks called him
Annjee’s sandy-headed child, and then just—Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He takes after his father,” Sister Lowry said, “ ’cept he’s
not so light. But he’s gonna be a mighty good-lookin’ boy
when he grows up, that’s sho!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I hopes he does,” Aunt Hager said. “But I’d rather
he’d be ugly ’fore he turns out anything like that good-for-nothing
Jimboy what comes here an’ stays a month, goes
away an’ stays six, an’ don’t hit a tap o’ work ’cept when he
feels like it. If it wasn’t for Annjee, don’t know how we’d eat,
’cause Sandy’s father sho don’t do nothin’ to support him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the colored people in Stanton knew that Hager bore
no love for Jimboy Rodgers, the tall good-looking yellow
fellow whom her second daughter had married.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“First place, I don’t like his name,” she would say in private.
“Who ever heard of a nigger named Jimboy, anyhow?
Next place, I ain’t never seen a yaller dude yet that meant a
dark woman no good—an’ Annjee is dark!” Aunt Hager had
other objections, too, although she didn’t like to talk evil
about folks. But what she probably referred to in her mind
was the question of his ancestry, for nobody knew who Jimboy’s
parents were.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>“Sandy, look out for the house while I run down an’ see
how is Mis’ Gavitt’s niece. An’ you-all play outdoors. Don’t
bring no chillen in, litterin’ up de place.” About eleven
o’clock Aunt Hager pulled a dustcap over her head and put
on a clean white apron. “Here, tie it for me, chile,” she said,
turning her broad back. “An’ mind you don’t hurt yo’self on
no rusty nails and rotten boards left from de storm. I’ll be
back atter while.” And she disappeared around the house,
walking proudly, her black face shining in the sunlight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Presently the two boys under the apple-tree were joined
by a coal-colored little girl who lived next door, one Willie-Mae
Johnson, and the mud balls under her hands became
mud pies carefully rounded and patted and placed in the
sun on the small box where the little chickens lived. Willie-Mae
was the mama, Sandy the papa, and Buster the baby as
the old game of “playing house” began anew.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By and by the mail-man’s whistle blew and the three children
scampered towards the sidewalk to meet him. The carrier
handed Sandy a letter. “Take it in the house,” he said.
But instead the youngsters sat on the front-door-sill, their
feet dangling where the porch had been, and began to examine
the envelope.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I bet that’s Lincoln’s picture,” said Buster.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, ’taint,” declared Willie-Mae. “It’s Rossiefelt!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, it’s Washington,” said Sandy. “And don’t you-all
touch my mama’s letter with your hands all muddy. It might
be from my papa, you can’t tell, and she wants it kept clean.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis from Jimboy,” Aunt Hager declared when she returned,
accompanied by her old friend, Sister Whiteside,
who peddled on foot fresh garden-truck she raised herself.
Aunt Hager had met her at the corner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I knows his writin’,” went on Hager. “An’ it’s got a postmark,
K-A-N-, Kansas City! That’s what ’tis! Niggers sho
do love Kansas City! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Huh! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. So that’s where he’s at.
Well, yo’ mama’ll be glad to get it. If she knowed it was here,
she’d quit work an’ come home now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sit down, Whiteside.
We gwine eat in a few minutes. You better have a bite
with us an’ stay an’ rest yo’self awhile, ’cause I knows you
been walkin’ this mawnin’!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Deed I is,” the old sister declared, dropping her basket
of lettuce and peas on the floor and taking a chair next to
the table in the kitchen. “An’ I ain’t sold much neither.
Seems like folks ain’t got no buyin’ appetite after all that
storm an’ wind last night—but de Lawd will provide! I ain’t
worried.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s right,” agreed Hager. “Might o’ been me blowed
away maself, ’stead o’ just ma porch, if Jesus hadn’t been
with us.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You Sandy! Make haste and wash yo’ hands, sir.
Rest o’ you chillens go on home, ’cause I know yo’ ma’s
lookin’ for you.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Huh! This wood fire’s mighty low!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager uncovered a pot that had been simmering on the
stove all morning and dished up a great bowlful of black-eyed
peas and salt pork. There was biscuit bread left from
breakfast. A plate of young onions and a pitcher of lemonade
stood on the white oilcloth-covered table. Heads were
automatically bowed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawd, make us thankful for this food. For Christ’s sake,
amen,” said Hager; then the two old women and the child
began to eat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s Elvira’s boy, ain’t it—that yaller-headed young-one
was here playin’ with Sandy?” Sister Whiteside had her
mouth full of onions and beans as she asked the question.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shsss! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. That’s her child!” said Hager. “But it ain’t Eddie’s!”
She gave her guest a meaning glance across the table,
then lowered her voice, pretending all the while that
Sandy’s ears were too young to hear. “They say she had that
chile ’fore she married Eddie. An’ black as Eddie is, you
knows an’ I knows ain’t due to be no golden hair in de family!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I knowed there must be something funny,” whispered
the old sister, screwing up her face. “That’s some white
man’s chile!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sho it is!” agreed Hager.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “I knowed it all de
time.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Have some mo’ meat, Whiteside. Help yo’self! We
ain’t got much, but such as ’tis, you’re welcome.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Yes, sir,
Buster’s some white man’s chile.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Stop reachin’ cross de
table for bread, Sandy. Where’s yo’ manners, sir? I declare,
chillens do try you sometimes.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Pass me de onions.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Truth, they tries you, yit I gits right lonesome since all
ma young ones is gone.” Sister Whiteside worked her few
good teeth vigorously, took a long swallow of lemonade,
and smacked her lips. “Chillen an’ grandchillen all in
Chicago an’ St. Louis an’ Wichita, an’ nary chick nor child
left with me in de house.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Pass me de bread, thank
yuh.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I feels kinder sad an’ sorry at times, po’ widder-woman
that I is. I has ma garden an’ ma hens, but all ma
chillens done grown and married.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Where’s yo’ daughter
Harriett at now, Hager? Is she married, too? I ain’t seen her
lately.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager pulled a meat skin through her teeth; then she answered:
“No, chile, she too young to marry yet! Ain’t but
sixteen, but she’s been workin’ out this summer, waitin’
table at de Stanton County Country Club. Been in de country
three weeks now, since school closed, but she comes in
town on Thursdays, though. It’s nigh six miles from here, so
de women-help sleeps there at night. I’s glad she’s out there,
Sister. Course Harriett’s a good girl, but she likes to be
frisky—wants to run de streets ’tendin’ parties an’ dances,
an’ I can’t do much with her no mo’, though I hates to say
it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But she’s a songster, Hager! An’ I hears she’s sho one
smart chile, besides. They say she’s up with them white
folks when it comes to books. An’ de high school where
she’s goin’ ain’t easy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. All ma young ones quit ’fore they
got through with it—wouldn’t go—ruther have a good time
runnin’ to Kansas City an’ galavantin’ round.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“De Lawd knows it’s a hard job, keepin’ colored chillens
in school, Sister Whiteside, a mighty hard job. De niggers
don’t help ’em, an’ de white folks don’t care if they stay or
not. An’ when they gets along sixteen an’ seventeen, they
wants this, an’ they wants that, an’ t’other—an’ when you
ain’t got it to give to ’em, they quits school an’ goes to
work.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Harriett say she ain’t goin’ back next fall. I feels
right hurt over it, but she ’clares she ain’t goin’ back to
school. Says there ain’t no use in learnin’ books fo’ nothin’
but to work in white folks’ kitchens when she’s graduated.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do she, Hager? I’s sho sorry! I’s gwine to talk to that gal.
Get Reverend Berry to talk to her, too.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You’s struggled to bring up yo’ chillens, an’ all we
Christians in de church ought to help you! I gwine see Reverend
Berry, see can’t he ’suade her to stay in school.” The
old woman reached for the onions. “But you ain’t never
raised no boys, though, has you, Hager?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, I ain’t. My two boy-chillens both died ’fore they was
ten. Just these three girls—Tempy, an’ Annjee, an’ Harriett—that’s
all I got. An’ this here grandchile, Sandy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Take
yo’ hands off that meat, sir! You had ’nough!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawd, you’s been lucky! I done raised seven grandchillen
’sides eight o’ ma own. An’ they don’t thank me. No,
sir! Go off and kick up they heels an’ git married an’ don’t
thank me a bit! Don’t even write, some of ’em.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Waitin’
fo’ me to die, I reckon, so’s they can squabble over de little
house I owns an’ ma garden.” The old visitor pushed back
her chair. “Huh! Yo’ dinner was sho good! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Waitin’ fo’
me to die.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Unhuh! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. That’s de way with ’em, Sister Whiteside.
Chillens don’t care—but I reckon we old ones can’t kick
much. They’s got to get off fo’ themselves. It’s natural, that’s
what ’tis. Now, my Tempy, she’s married and doin’ well. Got
a fine house, an’ her husband’s a mail-clerk in de civil service
makin’ good money. They don’t ’sociate no mo’ with
none but de high-toned colored folks, like Dr. Mitchell, an’
Mis’ Ada Walls, an’ Madam C. Frances Smith. Course
Tempy don’t come to see me much ’cause I still earns ma
livin’ with ma arms in de tub. But Annjee run in their house
out o’ the storm last night an’ she say Tempy’s just bought a
new pianer, an’ de house looks fine.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’s glad fo’ de chile.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sho, sho you is, Sister Williams, you’s a good mother an’
I knows you’s glad. But I hears from Reverend Berry that
Tempy’s done withdrawed from our church an’ joined de
Episcopals!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s right! She is. Last time I seed Tempy, she told me
she couldn’t stand de Baptist no mo’—too many low niggers
belonging, she say, so she’s gonna join Father Hill’s church,
where de best people go.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I told her I didn’t think much o’
joinin’ a church so far away from God that they didn’t want
nothin’ but yaller niggers for members, an’ so full o’ forms
an’ fashions that a good Christian couldn’t shout—but she
went on an’ joined. It’s de stylish temple, that’s why, so I ain’t
said no mo’. Tempy’s goin’ on thirty-five now, she’s ma oldest
chile, an’ I reckon she knows how she wants to act.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, I reckon she do.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But there ain’t no church like
de Baptist, praise God! Is there, Sister? If you ain’t been
dipped in that water an’ half drowned, you ain’t saved.
Tempy don’t know like we do. No, sir, she don’t know!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no fruit or dessert, and the soiled plates were
not removed from the table for a long time, for the two old
women, talking about their children, had forgotten the
dishes. Young flies crawled over the biscuit bread and
hummed above the bowl of peas, while the wood fire died in
the stove, and Sandy went out into the sunshine to play.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now, ma girl, Maggie,” said Sister Whiteside; “de man
she married done got to be a big lawyer in St. Louis. He’s in
de politics there, an’ Maggie’s got a fine job herself—social
servin’, they calls it. But I do’t hear from her once a year. An’
she don’t send me a dime. Ma boys looks out for me,
though, sometimes, round Christmas. There’s Lucius, what
runs on de railroad, an’ then Andrew, what rides de horses,
an’ John, in Omaha, sends me a little change now an’ then—all
but Charlie, an’ he never was thoughtful ’bout his
mother. He ain’t never sent me nothin’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, you sho is lucky,” said Hager, “ ’cause they ain’t no
money comes in this house, Christmas nor no other time,
less’n me an’ Annjee brings it here. Jimboy ain’t no good,
an’ what Harriett makes goes for clothes and parties an’
powderin’-rags. Course, I takes some from her every week,
but I gives it right back for her school things. An’ I ain’t
taken nothin’ from her these three weeks she’s been workin’
at de club. She say she’s savin’ her money herself. She’s past
sixteen now, so I lets her have it.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Po’ little thing! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She
does need to look purty.” Hager’s voice softened and her
dark old face was half abashed, kind and smiling. “You
know, last month I bought her a gold watch—surprise fo’
her birthday, de kind you hangs on a little pin on yo’ waist.
Lawd knows, I couldn’t ’ford it—took all de money from
three week’s o’ washin’, but I knowed she’d been wantin’ a
watch. An’ this front room—I moved ma bed out last year
an’ bought that new rug at de second-hand store an’ them
lace curtains so’s she could have a nice place to entertain her
comp’ny.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But de chile goes with such a kinder wild
crowd o’ young folks, Sister Whiteside! It worries me! The
boys, they cusses, an’ the girls, they paints, an’ some of ’em
live in de Bottoms. I been tried to get her out of it right
along, but seems like I can’t. That’s why I’s glad she’s in de
country fo’ de summer an’ comes in but only once a week,
an’ then she’s home with me. It’s too far to come in town at
night, she say, so she gets her rest now, goin’ to bed early an’
all, with de country air round her. I hopes she calms down
from runnin’ round when she comes back here to stay in de
fall.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She’s a good chile. She don’t lie to me ’bout where
she goes, nor nothin’ like that, but she’s just wild, that’s all,
just wild.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is she a Christian, Sister Williams?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, she ain’t. I’s sorry to say it of a chile o’ mine, but she
ain’t. She’s been on de moaner’s bench time after time, Sunday
mawnin’s an’ prayer-meetin’ evenin’s, but she never
would rise. I prays for her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, when she takes Jesus, she’ll see de light! That’s
what de matter with her, Sister Williams, she ain’t felt Him
yit. Make her go to church when she comes back here.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I
reckon you heard ’bout when de big revival’s due to come
off this year, ain’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, I ain’t, not yet.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Great colored tent-meetin’ with de Battle-Ax of de
Lawd, Reverend Braswell preachin’! Yes, sir! Gwine start
August eighteenth in de Hickory Woods yonder by de edge
o’ town.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good news,” cried Hager. “Mo’ sinners than enough’s in
need o’ savin’. I’s gwine to take Sandy an’ get him started
right with de Lawd. An’ if that onery Jimboy’s back here, I
gwine make him go, too, an’ look Jesus in de face. Annjee
an’ me’s saved, chile! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You, Sandy, bring us some drinkin’
water from de pump.” Aunt Hager rapped on the window
with her knuckles to the boy playing outside. “An’ stop
wrastlin’ with that gal.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy rose triumphant from the prone body of black little
Willie-Mae, lying squalling on the cinderpath near the
back gate. “She started it,” he yelled, running towards the
pump. The girl began a reply, but at that moment a rickety
wagon drawn by a white mule and driven by a grey-haired,
leather-colored old man came rattling down the alley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hy, there, Hager!” called an old Negro, tightening his
reins on the mule, which immediately began to eat corn-tops
over the back fence. “How you been treatin’ yo’self?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Right tolable,” cried Hager, for she and Sister Whiteside
had both emerged from the kitchen and were approaching
the driver. “How you doin’, Brother Logan?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, if here ain’t Sis’ Whiteside, too!” said the old beau,
sitting up straight on his wagon-seat and showing a row of
ivory teeth in a wide grin. “I’s doin’ purty well for a po’ widower
what ain’t got nobody to bake his bread. Doin’ purty
well. Hee! Hee! None o’ you-all ain’t sorry for me, is you?
How de storm treat you, Hager? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Says it carried off yo’
porch? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. That’s certainly too bad! Well, it did some o’
these white folks worse’n that. I got ’nough work to do to
last me de next fo’ weeks, cleanin’ up yards an’ haulin’ off
trash, me an’ dis mule here.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. How’s yo’ chillen, Sis’
Williams?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, they all right, thank yuh. Annjee’s still at Mis’ Rice’s,
an’ Harriet’s in de country at de club.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is she?” said Brother Logan. “I seed her in town night
’fore last down on Pearl Street ’bout ten o’clock.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You ain’t seed Harriett no night ’fore last,” disputed
Hager vigorously. “She don’t come in town ’ceptin’ Thursday
aftenoons, an’ that’s tomorrow.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sister, I ain’t blind,” said the old man, hurt that his truth
should be doubted. “I—seen—Harriett Williams on Pearl
Street .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with Maudel Smothers an’ two boys ’bout ten
o’clock day before yestidy night! An’ they was gwine to de
Waiters’ Ball, ’cause I asked Maudel where they was gwine,
an’ she say so. Then I says to Harriett: ‘Does yo’ mammy
know you’s out this late?’ an’ she laughed an’ say: ‘Oh, that’s
all right!’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Don’t tell me I ain’t seen Harriett, Hager.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Lawd help!” Aunt Hager cried, her mouth open.
“You done seed my chile in town an’ she ain’t come anear
home! Stayed all night at Maudel’s, I reckon.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I tells her
’bout runnin’ with that gal from de Bottoms. That’s what
makes her lie to me—tellin’ me she don’t come in town o’
nights. Maudel’s folks don’t keep no kind o’ house, and
mens goes there, an’ they sells licker, an’ they gambles an’
fights.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Is you sho that’s right, Brother Logan, ma chile
done been in town an’ ain’t come home?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It ain’t wrong!” said old man Logan, cracking his long
whip on the white mule’s haunches. “Gittiyap! You ole
jinny!” and he drove off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Um-uh!” said Sister Whiteside to Hager as the two toil-worn
old women walked towards the house. “That’s de way
they does you!” The peddler gathered up her things. “I better
be movin’, ’cause I got these greens to sell yit, an’ it’s gittin’
’long towards evenin’.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. That’s de way chillens does
you, Sister Williams! I knows! That’s de way they does!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap03'>CHAPTER III</h1></div>

<h3>Jimboy’s Letter</h3>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'><span class='sc'>Kansas City, Mo.</span></p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'>13 June 1912</p>

<p class='noindent'>Dear Annjelica,</p>

<p class='pindent'>I been laying off to written you ever since I left home but
you know how it is. Work has not been so good here. Am
with a section gang of coloreds and greeks and somehow
strained my back on the Union Pacific laying ties so I will
be home on Saturday. Will do my best to try and finish out
weak here. Love my darling wife also kiss my son Sandy for
me. Am dying to see you,</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'>affectionately as ever and allways</p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'>till the judgment day,</p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'><span class='sc'>Jimboy Rodgers</span></p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>“Strained his back, has he? Unhuh! An’ then comes
writin’ ’bout till de judgment day!” Hager muttered when
she heard it. “Always something wrong with that nigger!
He’ll be back here now, layin’ round, doin’ nothin’ fo’ de
rest o’ de summer, turnin’ ma house into a theatre with him
an’ Harriett singin’ their rag-time, an’ that guitar o’ his’n
wangin’ ever’ evenin’! ’Tween him an’ Harriett both it’s a
wonder I ain’t plumb crazy. But Harriett do work fo’ her
livin’. She ain’t no loafer.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Huh! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Annjee, you was sho
a fool when you married that boy, an’ you still is! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’s
gwine next do’ to Sister Johnson’s!” Aunt Hager went out
the back and across the yard, where, next door, Tom and
Sarah Johnson, Willie-Mae’s grandparents, sat on a bench
against the side-wall of an unpainted shanty. They were
both quietly smoking their corn-cob pipes in the evening
dusk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy, looking at the back of the letter that his mother
held, stood at the kitchen-table rapidly devouring a large
piece of fresh lemon pie, which she had brought from Mrs.
J. J. Rice’s. Annjee had said to save the two cold fried lamb
chops until tomorrow, or Sandy would have eaten those,
too.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wish you’d brought home some more pie,” the boy declared,
his lips white with meringue, but Annjee, who had
just got in from work, paid no attention to her son’s appreciative
remarks on her cookery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Instead she said: “Ma certainly ain’t got no time for Jimboy,
has she?” and then sat down with the open letter still in
her hand—a single sheet of white paper pencilled in large
awkward letters. She put it on the table, rested her dark face
in her hands, and began to read it again.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She knew how
it was, of course, that her husband hadn’t written before.
That was all right now. Working all day in the hot sun with
a gang of Greeks, a man was tired at night, besides living in
a box-car, where there was no place to write a letter anyway.
He was a great big kid, that’s what Jimboy was, cut out for
playing. But when he did work, he tried to outdo everybody
else. Annjee could see him in her mind, tall and well-built,
his legs apart, muscles bulging as he swung the big hammer
above his head, driving steel. No wonder he hurt his back,
trying to lay more ties a day than anybody else on the railroad.
That was just like Jimboy. But she was kind of pleased
he had hurt it, since it would bring him home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ain’t you glad he’s comin’, Sandy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure,” answered the child, swallowing his last mouthful
of pie. “I hope he brings me that gun he promised to buy
last Easter.” The boy wiped his sticky hands on the dishcloth
and ran out into the back yard, calling: “Willie-Mae!
Willie-Mae!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stay right over yonder!” answered his grandmother
through the dusk. “Willie-Mae’s in de bed, sir, an’ we old
folks settin’ out here tryin’ to have a little peace.” From the
tone of Hager’s voice he knew he wasn’t wanted in the Johnson’s
yard, so he went back into the house, looked at his
mother reading her letter again, and then lay down on the
kitchen floor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Affectionately as ever and allways till the judgment day,”
she read, “Jimboy Rodgers.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He loved her, Annjee was sure of that, and it wasn’t another
woman that made him go away so often. Eight years
they’d been married. No, nine—because Sandy was nine,
and he was ready to be born when they had had the wedding.
And Jimboy left the week after they were married, to
go to Omaha, where he worked all winter. When he came
back, Sandy was in the world, sitting up sucking meat skins.
It was springtime and they bought a piano for the house—but
later the instalment man came and took it back to the
store. All that summer her husband stayed home and
worked a little, but mostly he fished, played pool, taught
Harriett to buck-dance, and quarrelled with Aunt Hager.
Then in the winter he went to Jefferson City and got a job
at the Capitol.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy was always going, but Aunt Hager was wrong
about his never working. It was just that he couldn’t stay in
one place all the time. He’d been born running, he said, and
had run ever since. Besides, what was there in Stanton anyhow
for a young colored fellow to do except dig sewer
ditches for a few cents an hour or maybe porter around a
store for seven dollars a week. Colored men couldn’t get
many jobs in Stanton, and foreigners were coming in, taking
away what little work they did have. No wonder he didn’t
stay home. Hadn’t Annjee’s father been in Stanton forty
years and hadn’t he died with Aunt Hager still taking in
washings to help keep up the house?</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no well-paid work for Negro men, so Annjee
didn’t blame Jimboy for going away looking for something
better. She’d go with him if it wasn’t for her mother. If she
went, though, Aunt Hager wouldn’t have anybody for company
but Harriett, and Harriett was the youngest and
wildest of the three children. With Pa Williams dead going
on ten years, Hager washing every day, Tempy married, and
Annjee herself out working, there had been nobody to take
much care of the little sister as she grew up. Harriett had
had no raising, even though she was smart and in high
school. A female child needed care. But she could sing!
Lawdy! And dance, too! That was another reason why Aunt
Hager didn’t like Jimboy. The devil’s musicianer, she called
him, straight from hell, teaching Harriett buck-and-winging!
But when he took his soft-playing guitar and picked out
spirituals and old-time Christian hymns on its sweet
strings, Hager forgot she was his enemy, and sang and
rocked with the rest of them. When Jimboy was home, you
couldn’t get lonesome or blue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee, I’ll be glad when he comes!” Annjee said to herself.
“But if he goes off again, I’ll feel like dying in this dead old
town. I ain’t never been away from here nohow.” She spoke
aloud to the dim oil-lamp smoking on the table and the
sleeping boy on the floor. “I believe I’ll go with him next
time. I declare I do!” And then, realizing that Jimboy had
never once told her when he was leaving or for what destination,
she amended her utterance. “I’ll follow him,
though, as soon as he writes.” Because, almost always after
he had been away two or three weeks, he would write. “I’ll
follow him, sure, if he goes off again. I’ll leave Sandy here
and send money back to mama. Then Harriett could settle
down and take care of ma and stop runnin’ the streets so
much.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Yes, that’s what I’ll do next time!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This going away was a new thought, and the dark,
strong-bodied young woman at the table suddenly began to
dream of the cities she had never seen to which Jimboy
would lead her. Why, he had been as far north as Canada
and as far south as New Orleans, and it wasn’t anything for
him to go to Chicago or Denver any time! He was a travelling
man—and she, Annjee, was too meek and quiet, that’s
what she was—too stay-at-homish. Never going nowhere,
never saying nothing back to those who scolded her or
talked about her, not even sassing white folks when they got
beside themselves. And every colored girl in town said that
Mrs. J. J. Rice was no easy white woman to work for, yet she
had been there now five years, accepting everything without
a murmur! Most young folks, girls and boys, left Stanton
as soon as they could for the outside world, but here she
was, Annjelica Williams, going on twenty-eight, and had
never been as far as Kansas City!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want to travel,” she said to herself. “I want to go places,
too.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But that was why Jimboy married her, because she wasn’t
a runabout. He’d had enough of those kind of women before
he struck Stanton, he said. St. Louis was full of them,
and Chicago running over. She was the first nice girl he’d
ever met who lived at home, so he took her.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. There were
mighty few dark women had a light, strong, good-looking
young husband, really a married husband, like Jimboy, and a
little brown kid like Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m mighty lucky,” Annjee thought, “even if he ain’t
here.” And two tears of foolish pride fell from the bright
eyes in her round black face. They trickled down on the letter,
with its blue lines and pencil-scrawled message, and
some of the words on the paper began to blur into purple
blots because the pencil had been an indelible one. Quickly
she fumbled for a handkerchief to wipe the tears away, when
a voice made her start.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You, Annjee!” cried Aunt Hager in the open door. “Go
to bed, chile! Go on! Settin’ up here this late, burnin’ de
light an’ lurin’ all sorts o’ night-bugs an’ creepers into de
house!” The old woman came in out of the dark. “Lawd! I
might anigh stumbled over this boy in de middle o’ de flo’!
An’ you ain’t even took off yo’ hat since you got home from
work! Is you crazy? Settin’ up here at night with yo’ hat on,
an’ lettin’ this chile catch his death o’ cold sleepin’ down on
de flo’ long after his bedtime!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sheepishly Annjee folded her letter and got up. It was
true that she still had on her hat and the sweater she had
worn to Mrs. Rice’s. True, too, the whole room was alive
with soft-winged moths fluttering against the hot glass of
the light—and on the kitchen floor a small, brown-skin, infinitely
lovable edition of Jimboy lay sprawled contentedly
in his grandmother’s path, asleep!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s my baby!” Annjee said gently, stooping to pick him
up. “He’s my baby—me and Jimboy’s baby!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap04'>CHAPTER IV</h1></div>

<h3>Thursday Afternoon</h3>

<p class='pindent'>Hager had risen at sunrise. On Thursday she did the Reinharts’
washing, on Fridays she ironed it, and on Saturdays
she sent it home, clean and beautifully white, and received
as pay the sum of seventy-five cents. During the winter
Hager usually did half a dozen washings a week, but during
the hot season her customers had gone away, and only the
Reinharts, on account of an invalid grandmother with
whom they could not travel, remained in Stanton.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wednesday afternoon Sandy, with a boy named Jimmy
Lane, called at the back door for their soiled clothes. Each
child took a handle and between them carried the large
wicker basket seven blocks to Aunt Hager’s kitchen. For this
service Jimmy Lane received five cents a trip, although Sister
Lane had repeatedly said to Hager that he needn’t be
given anything. She wanted him to learn his Christian duties
by being useful to old folks. But Jimmy was not inclined
to be Christian. On the contrary, he was a very bad little
boy of thirteen, who often led Sandy astray. Sometimes
they would run with the basket for no reason at all, then
stumble and spill the clothes out on the sidewalk—Mrs.
Reinhart’s summer dresses, and drawers, and Mr. Reinhart’s
extra-large B.V.D.’s lying generously exposed to the public.
Sometimes, if occasion offered, the youngsters would stop
to exchange uncouth epithets with strange little white boys
who called them “niggers.” Or, again, they might neglect
their job for a game of marbles, or a quarter-hour of scrub
baseball on a vacant lot; or to tease any little colored girl
who might tip timidly by with her hair in tight, well-oiled
braids—while the basket of garments would be left forlornly
in the street without guardian. But when the clothes
were safe in Aunt Hager’s kitchen, Jimmy would usually buy
candy with his nickel and share it with Sandy before he
went home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After soaking all night, the garments were rubbed
through the suds in the morning; and in the afternoon the
colored articles were on the line while the white pieces were
boiling seriously in a large tin boiler on the kitchen-stove.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They sho had plenty this week,” Hager said to her
grandson, who sat on the stoop eating a slice of bread and
apple butter. “I’s mighty late gettin’ ’em hung out to dry,
too. Had no business stoppin’ this mawnin’ to go see sick
folks, and me here got all I can do maself! Looks like this
warm weather old Mis’ Reinhart must change ever’ piece
from her dress to her shimmy three times a day—sendin’
me a washin’ like this here!” They heard the screen-door at
the front of the house open and slam. “It’s a good thing they
got me to do it fo’ ’em! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy, see who’s that at de do’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was Harriett, home from the country club for the afternoon,
cool and slender and pretty in her black uniform
with its white collar, her smooth black face and neck powdered
pearly, and her crinkly hair shining with pomade. She
smelled nice and perfumy as Sandy jumped on her like a
dog greeting a favorite friend. Harriett kissed him and let
him hang to her arm as they went through the bedroom to
the kitchen. She carried a brown cardboard suit-case and a
wide straw hat in one hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hello, mama,” she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager poked the boiling clothes with a vigorous splash of
her round stick. The steam rose in clouds of soapy vapor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I been waitin’ for you, madam!” her mother replied in
tones that were not calculated to welcome pleasantly an
erring daughter. “I wants to know de truth—was you in
town last Monday night or not?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett dropped her suit-case against the wall. “You
seem to have the truth,” she said carelessly. “How’d you get
it? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Here, Sandy, take this out in the yard and eat it, seed
and all.” She gave her nephew a plum she had brought in
her pocket. “I <span class='it'>was</span> in town, but I didn’t have time to come
home. I had to go to Maudel’s because she’s making me a
dress.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To Maudel’s! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Unhuh! An’ to de Waiters’ Ball, besides
galavantin’ up an’ down Pearl Street after ten o’clock!
I wouldn’t cared so much if you’d told me beforehand, but
you said you didn’t come in town ’ceptin’ Thursday afternoon,
an’ here I was believing yo’ lies.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s no lies! I haven’t been in town before.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who brung you here at night anyhow—an’ there ain’t
no trains runnin’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, I came in with the cook and some of the boys, mama,
that’s who! They hired an auto for the dance. What would
be the use coming home, when you and Annjee go to bed
before dark like chickens?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s all right, madam! Annjee’s got sense—savin’ her
health an’ strength!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett was not impressed. “For what? To spend her life
in Mrs. Rice’s kitchen?” She shrugged her shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What you bring yo’ suit-case home fo’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m quitting the job Saturday,” she said. “I’ve told them
already.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Quitting!” her mother exclaimed. “What fo’? Lawd, if it
ain’t one thing, it’s another!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What for?” Harriett retorted angrily. “There’s plenty
what for! All that work for five dollars a week with what little
tips those pikers give you. And white men insulting you
besides, asking you to sleep with ’em. Look at my fingernails,
all broke from scrubbing that dining-room floor.” She
thrust out her dark slim hands. “Waiting table and cleaning
silver, washing and ironing table-linen, and then scrubbing
the floor besides—that’s too much of a good thing! And
only three waitresses on the job. That old steward out
there’s a regular white folks’ nigger. He don’t care how hard
he works us girls. Well, I’m through with the swell new
Stanton County Country Club this coming Saturday—I’m
telling everybody!” She shrugged her shoulders again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What you gonna do then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maudel says I can get a job with her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maudel? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Where?” The old woman had begun to
wring the clothes dry and pile them in a large dish-pan.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“At the Banks Hotel, chambermaid, for pretty good pay.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager stopped again and turned decisively towards her
daughter. “You ain’t gonna work in no hotel. You hear me!
They’s dives o’ sin, that’s what they is, an’ a child o’ mine
ain’t goin’ in one. If you was a boy, I wouldn’t let you go,
much less a girl! They ain’t nothin’ but strumpets works in
hotels.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maudel’s no strumpet.” Harriett’s eyes narrowed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know if she is or ain’t, but I knows I wants you to
stop runnin’ with her—I done tole you befo’.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Her
mammy ain’t none too straight neither, raisin’ them chillen
in sin. Look at Sammy in de reform school ’fore he were fifteen
for gamblin’. An’ de oldest chile, Essie, done gone to
Kansas City with that yaller devil she ain’t married. An’
Maudel runnin’ de streets night an’ day, with you tryin’ to
keep up with her! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lawd a mercy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Here, hang up
these clothes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her mother pointed to the tin pan on the table filled with
damp, twisted, white underwear. Harriett took the pan in
both hands. It was heavy and she trembled with anger as she
lifted it to her shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You can bark at me if you want to, mama, but don’t talk
about my friends. I don’t care what they are! Maudel’d do
anything for me. And her brother’s a good kid, whether he’s
been in reform school or not. They oughtn’t to put him
there just for shooting dice. What’s that? I like him, and I
like Mrs. Smothers, too. She’s not always scolding people
for wanting a good time and for being lively and trying to
be happy.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hot tears raced down each cheek, leaving moist lines in
the pink powder. Sandy, playing marbles with Buster under
the apple-tree, heard her sniffling as she shook out the
clothes and hung them on the line in the yard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You, Sandy,” Aunt Hager called loudly from the
kitchen-door. “Come in here an’ get me some water an’ cut
mo’ firewood.” Her black face was wet with perspiration
and drawn from fatigue and worry. “I got to get the rest o’
these clothes out yet this evenin’.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. That Chile Harriett’s
aggravatin’ me to death! Help me, Sandy, honey.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They ate supper in silence, for Hager’s attempts at conversation
with her young daughter were futile. Once the old
woman said: “That onery Jimboy’s comin’ home Saturday,”
and Harriett’s face brightened a moment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee, I’m glad,” she replied, and then her mouth went
sullen again. Sandy began uncomfortably to kick the tableleg.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“For Christ’s sake!” The girl frowned, and the child
stopped, hurt that his favorite aunt should yell at him peevishly
for so slight an offense.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawd knows, I wish you’d try an’ be mo’ like yo’ sisters,
Annjee an’ Tempy,” Hager began as she washed the dishes,
while Harriett stood near the stove, cloth in hand, waiting
to dry them. “Here I is, an old woman, an’ you tries ma soul!
After all I did to raise you, you don’t even hear me when I
speak.” It was the old theme again, without variation. “Now,
there’s Annjee, ain’t a better chile livin’—if she warn’t crazy
’bout Jimboy. An’ Tempy married an’ doin’ well, an’ respected
ever’where.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ you runnin’ wild!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tempy?” Harriett sneered suddenly, pricked by this
comparison. “So respectable you can’t touch her with a ten-foot
pole, that’s Tempy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Annjee’s all right, working herself
to death at Mrs. Rice’s, but don’t tell me about Tempy.
Just because she’s married a mail-clerk with a little property,
she won’t even see her own family any more. When
niggers get up in the world, they act just like white folks—don’t
pay you no mind. And Tempy’s that kind of a nigger—she’s
up in the world now!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Close yo’ mouth, talking that way ’bout yo’ own sister! I
ain’t asked her to be always comin’ home, is I, if she’s satisfied
in her own house?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, you aren’t asking her, mama, but you’re always talking
about her being so respectable.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, I don’t want to
be respectable if I have to be stuck up and dicty like Tempy
is.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She’s colored and I’m colored and I haven’t seen her
since before Easter.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It’s not being black that matters
with her, though, it’s being poor, and that’s what we are, you
and me and Annjee, working for white folks and washing
clothes and going in back doors, and taking tips and insults.
I’m tired of it, mama! I want to have a good time once in a
while.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s ’bout all you does have is a good time,” Hager
said. “An’ it ain’t right, an’ it ain’t Christian, that’s what it
ain’t! An’ de Lawd is takin’ notes on you!” The old woman
picked up the heavy iron skillet and began to wash it inside
and out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, the church has made a lot of you old Negroes act
like Salvation Army people,” the girl returned, throwing the
dried knives and forks on the table. “Afraid to even laugh on
Sundays, afraid for a girl and boy to look at one another, or
for people to go to dances. Your old Jesus is white, I guess,
that’s why! He’s white and stiff and don’t like niggers!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager gasped while Harriett went on excitedly, disregarding
her mother’s pain: “Look at Tempy, the highest-class
Christian in the family—Episcopal, and so holy she
can’t even visit her own mother. Seems like all the good-time
people are bad, and all the old Uncle Toms and mean,
dried-up, long-faced niggers fill the churches. I don’t never
intend to join a church if I can help it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Have mercy on this chile! Help her an’ save her from
hell-fire! Change her heart, Jesus!” the old woman begged,
standing in the middle of the kitchen with uplifted arms.
“God have mercy on ma daughter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett, her brow wrinkled in a steady frown, put the
dishes away, wiped the table, and emptied the water with a
splash through the kitchen-door. Then she went into the
bedroom that she shared with her mother, and began to undress.
Sandy saw, beneath her thin white underclothes, the
soft black skin of her shapely young body.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where you goin’?” Hager asked sharply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Out,” said the girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Out where?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, to a barbecue at Willow Grove, mama! The boys are
coming by in an auto at seven o’clock.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What boys?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maudel’s brother and some fellows.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You ain’t goin’ a step!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A pair of curling-irons swung in the chimney of the
lighted lamp on the dresser. Harriett continued to get
ready. She was making bangs over her forehead, and the
scent of scorching hair-oil drifted by Sandy’s nose.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Up half de night in town Monday, an’ de Lawd knows
how late ever’ night in de country, an’ then you comes home
to run out agin! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You ain’t goin’!” continued her mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett was pulling on a pair of red silk stockings, bright
and shimmering to her hips.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You quit singin’ in de church choir. You say you ain’t
goin’ back to school. You won’t keep no job! Now what is
you gonna do? Yo’ pappy said years ago, ’fore he died, you
was too purty to ’mount to anything, but I ain’t believed
him. His last dyin’ words was: ‘Look out fo’ ma baby Harriett.’
You was his favourite chile.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Now look at you! Runnin’
de streets an’ wearin’ red silk stockings!” Hager trembled.
“Spose yo’ pappy was to come back an’ see you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett powdered her face and neck, pink on ebony,
dashed white talcum at each arm-pit, and rubbed her ears
with perfume from a thin bottle. Then she slid a light-blue
dress of many ruffles over her head. The skirt ended midway
between the ankle and the knee, and she looked very
cute, delicate, and straight, like a black porcelain doll in a
Vienna toy shop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Some o’ Maudel’s makin’s, that dress—anybody can tell,”
her mother went on quarrelling. “Short an’ shameless as it
can be! Regular bad gal’s dress, that’s what ’tis.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What you
puttin’ it on fo’ anyhow, an’ I done told you you ain’t goin’
out? You must think I don’t mean ma words. Ain’t more’n
sixteen last April an’ runnin’ to barbecues at Willer Grove!
De idee! When I was yo’ age, wasn’t up after eight o’clock,
’ceptin’ Sundays in de church house, that’s all.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lawd
knows where you young ones is headin’. An’ me prayin’ an’
washin’ ma fingers to de bone to keep a roof over yo’ head.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sharp honk of an automobile horn sounded from the
street. A big red car, full of laughing brown girls gaily
dressed, and coatless, slick-headed black boys in green and
yellow silk shirts, drew up at the curb. Somebody squeezed
the bulb of the horn a second time and another loud and
saucy honk! struck the ears.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You, Sandy,” Hager commanded. “Run out there an’ tell
them niggers to leave here, ’cause Harriett ain’t goin’ no
place.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy did not move, because his young and slender
aunt had gripped him firmly by the collar while she
searched feverishly in the dresser-drawer for a scarf. She
pulled it out, long and flame-colored, with fiery, silky
fringe, before she released the little boy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You ain’t gwine a step this evenin’!” Hager shouted.
“Don’t you hear me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, no?” said Harriett coolly, in a tone that cut like
knives. “You’re the one that says I’m not going—<span class='it'>but I am!</span>”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then suddenly something happened in the room—the
anger fell like a veil from Hager’s face, disclosing aged,
helpless eyes full of fear and pain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Harriett, honey, I wants you to be good,” the old woman
stammered. The words came pitiful and low—not a command
any longer—as she faced her terribly alive young
daughter in the ruffled blue dress and the red silk stockings.
“I just wants you to grow up decent, chile. I don’t want you
runnin’ to Willer Grove with them boys. It ain’t no place fo’
you in the night-time—an’ you knows it. You’s mammy’s
baby girl. She wants you to be good, honey, and follow Jesus,
that’s all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The baritone giggling of the boys in the auto came across
the yard as Hager started to put a timid, restraining hand on
her daughter’s shoulder—but Harriett backed away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You old fool!” she cried. “Lemme go! You old Christian
fool!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She ran through the door and across the sidewalk to the
waiting car, where the arms of the young men welcomed
her eagerly. The big machine sped swiftly down the street
and the rapid sput! sput! sput! of its engine grew fainter and
fainter. Finally, the auto was only a red tail-light in the summer
dusk. Sandy, standing beside his grandmother in the
doorway, watched it until it disappeared.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap05'>CHAPTER V</h1></div>

<h3>Guitar</h3>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Throw yo’ arms around me, baby.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Like de circle round de sun!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Baby, throw yo’ arms around me</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Like de circle round de sun,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ tell yo’ pretty papa</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>How you want yo’ lovin’ done!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy was home. All the neighborhood could hear his rich
low baritone voice giving birth to the blues. On Saturday
night he and Annjee went to bed early. On Sunday night
Aunt Hager said: “Put that guitar right up, less’n it’s hymns
you plans on playin’. An’ I don’t want too much o’ them,
’larmin’ de white neighbors.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But this was Monday, and the sun had scarcely fallen below
the horizon before the music had begun to float down
the alley, over back fences and into kitchen-windows where
nice white ladies sedately washed their supper dishes.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Did you ever see peaches</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Growin’ on a watermelon vine?</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Says did you ever see peaches</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>On a watermelon vine?</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Did you ever see a woman</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>That I couldn’t get for mine?</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Long, lazy length resting on the kitchen-door-sill, back
against the jamb, feet in the yard, fingers picking his sweet
guitar, left hand holding against its finger-board the back of
an old pocket-knife, sliding the knife upward, downward,
getting thus weird croons and sighs from the vibrating
strings:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>O, I left ma mother</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ I cert’ly can leave you.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Indeed I left ma mother</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ I cert’ly can leave you,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>For I’d leave any woman</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>That mistreats me like you do.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy, remembering brown-skin mamas in Natchez,
Shreveport, Dallas; remembering Creole women in Baton
Rouge, Louisiana:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>O, yo’ windin’ an’ yo’ grindin’</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Don’t have no effect on me,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Babe, yo’ windin’ an’ yo’ grindin’</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Don’t have no ’fect on me,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>’Cause I can wind an’ grind</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Like a monkey round a coconut-tree!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Then Harriett, standing under the ripening apple-tree,
in the backyard, chiming in:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Now I see that you don’t want me,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>So it’s fare thee, fare thee well!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Lawd, I see that you don’t want me,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>So it’s fare—thee—well!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I can still get plenty lovin’.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ you can go to—Kansas City!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“O, play it, sweet daddy Jimboy!” She began to dance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then Hager, from her seat on the edge of the platform
covering the well, broke out: “Here, madam! Stop that
prancin’! Bad enough to have all this singin’ without turnin’
de yard into a show-house.” But Harriett kept on, her hands
picking imaginary cherries out of the stars, her hips speaking
an earthly language quite their own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You got it, kid,” said Jimboy, stopping suddenly, then
fingering his instrument for another tune. “You do it like
the stage women does. You’ll be takin’ Ada Walker’s place if
you keep on.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wha! Wha! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You chillen sho can sing!” Tom Johnson
shouted his compliments from across the yard. And Sarah,
beside him on the bench behind their shack, added: “Minds
me o’ de ole plantation times, honey! It sho do!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Unhuh! Bound straight fo’ de devil, that’s what they is,”
Hager returned calmly from her place beside the pump.
“You an’ Harriett both—singin’ an’ dancin’ this stuff befo’
these chillens here.” She pointed to Sandy and Willie-Mae,
who sat on the ground with their backs against the chicken-box.
“It’s a shame!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I likes it,” said Willie-Mae.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Me too,” the little boy agreed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Naturally you would—none o’ you-all’s converted yet,”
countered the old woman to the children as she settled back
against the pump to listen to some more.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The music rose hoarse and wild:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I wonder where ma easy rider’s gone?</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>He done left me, put ma new gold watch in pawn.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>It was Harriett’s voice in plaintive moan to the night sky.
Jimboy had taught her that song, but a slight, clay-colored
brown boy who had hopped bells at the Clinton Hotel for a
couple of months, on his way from Houston to Omaha, discovered
its meaning to her. Puppy-love, maybe, but it had
hurt when he went away, saying nothing. And the guitar in
Jimboy’s hands echoed that old pain with an even greater
throb than the original ache itself possessed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Approaching footsteps came from the front yard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lord, I can hear you-all two blocks away!” said Annjee,
coming around the house, home from work, with a bundle
of food under her left arm. “Hello! How are you, daddy?
Hello, ma! Gimme a kiss Sandy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lord, I’m hot and tired
and most played out. This late just getting from
work! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Here, Jimboy, come on in and eat some of these
nice things the white folks had for supper.” She stepped
across her husband’s outstretched legs into the kitchen. “I
brought a mighty good piece of cold ham for you, hon’,
from Mis’ Rice’s.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, sure, I’ll be there in a minute,” the man said,
but he went on playing <span class='it'>Easy Rider</span>, and Harriett went on
singing, while the food was forgotten on the table until long
after Annjee had come outdoors again and sat down in the
cool, tired of waiting for Jimboy to come in to her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Off and on for nine years, ever since he had married Annjee,
Jimboy and Harriett had been singing together in the
evenings. When they started, Harriett was a little girl with
braided hair, and each time that her roving brother-in-law
stopped in Stanton, he would amuse himself by teaching
her the old Southern songs, the popular rag-time ditties,
and the hundreds of varying verses of the blues that he
would pick up in the big dirty cities of the South. The child,
with her strong sweet voice (colored folks called it alto) and
her racial sense of rhythm, soon learned to sing the songs as
well as Jimboy. He taught her the <span class='it'>parse me la</span>, too, and a few
other movements peculiar to Southern Negro dancing, and
sometimes together they went through the buck and wing
and a few taps. It was all great fun, and innocent fun except
when one stopped to think, as white folks did, that some of
the blues lines had, not only double, but triple meanings,
and some of the dance steps required very definite movements
of the hips. But neither Harriett nor Jimboy soiled
their minds by thinking. It was music, good exercise—and
they loved it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you know this one, Annjee?” asked Jimboy, calling
his wife’s name out of sudden politeness because he had forgotten
to eat her food, had hardly looked at her, in fact,
since she came home. Now he glanced towards her in the
darkness where she sat plump on a kitchen-chair in the
yard, apart from the others, with her back to the growing
corn in the garden. Softly he ran his fingers, light as a
breeze, over his guitar strings, imitating the wind rustling
through the long leaves of the corn. A rectangle of light
from the kitchen-door fell into the yard striking sidewise
across the healthy orange-yellow of his skin above the unbuttoned
neck of his blue laborer’s shirt.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on, sing it with us, Annjee,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know it,” Annjee replied, with a lump in her
throat, and her eyes on the silhouette of his long, muscular,
animal-hard body. She loved Jimboy too much, that’s what
was the matter with her! She knew there was nothing between
him and her young sister except the love of music, yet
he might have dropped the guitar and left Harriett in the
yard for a little while to come eat the nice cold slice of ham
she had brought him. She hadn’t seen him all day long.
When she went to work this morning, he was still in bed—and
now the blues claimed him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the starry blackness the singing notes of the guitar became
a plaintive hum, like a breeze in a grove of palmettos;
became a low moan, like the wind in a forest of live-oaks
strung with long strands of hanging moss. The voice of Annjee’s
golden, handsome husband on the door-step rang high
and far away, lonely-like, crying with only the guitar, not his
wife, to understand; crying grotesquely, crying absurdly in
the summer night:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I got a mule to ride.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I got a mule to ride.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Down in the South somewhere</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I got a mule to ride.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Then asking the question as an anxious, left-lonesome
girl-sweetheart would ask it:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>You say you goin’ North.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>You say you goin’ North.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>How ’bout yo’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. lovin’ gal?</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>You say you goin’ North.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Then sighing in rhythmical despair:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>O, don’t you leave me here.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Babe, don’t you leave me here.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Dog-gone yo’ comin’ back!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Said don’t you leave me here.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>On and on the song complained, man-verses and
woman-verses, to the evening air in stanzas that Jimboy had
heard in the pine-woods of Arkansas from the lumbercamp
workers; in other stanzas that were desperate and
dirty like the weary roads where they were sung; and in still
others that the singer created spontaneously in his own
mouth then and there:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>O, I done made ma bed,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Says I done made ma bed.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Down in some lonesome grave</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I done made ma bed.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>It closed with a sad eerie twang.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s right decent,” said Hager. “Now I wish you-all’d
play some o’ ma pieces like <span class='it'>When de Saints Come Marchin’ In</span>
or <span class='it'>This World Is Not Ma Home</span>—something Christian from
de church.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, mama, it’s not Sunday yet,” said Harriett.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sing <span class='it'>Casey Jones</span>,” called old man Tom Johnson. “That’s
ma song.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So the ballad of the immortal engineer with another
mama in the Promised Land rang out promptly in the
starry darkness, while everybody joined in the choruses.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, pick it, boy,” yelled the old man. “Can’t nobody play
like you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And Jimboy remembered when he was a lad in Memphis
that W. C. Handy had said: “You ought to make your living
out of that, son.” But he hadn’t followed it up—too many
things to see, too many places to go, too many other jobs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What song do you like, Annjee?” he asked, remembering
her presence again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, I don’t care. Any ones you like. All of ’em are pretty.”
She was pleased and petulant and a little startled that he had
asked her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, then,” he said. “Listen to me:”</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Here I is in de mean ole jail.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Ain’t got nobody to go ma bail.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Lonesome an’ sad an’ chain gang bound—</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Ever’ friend I had’s done turned me down.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“That’s sho it!” shouted Tom Johnson in great sympathy.
“Now, when I was in de Turner County Jail .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shut up yo’ mouth!” squelched Sarah, jabbing her husband
in the ribs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The songs went on, blues, shouts, jingles, old hits: <span class='it'>Bon
Bon Buddy, the Chocolate Drop</span>; <span class='it'>Wrap Me in Your Big Red
Shawl</span>; <span class='it'>Under the Old Apple Tree</span>; <span class='it'>Turkey in the Straw</span>—Jimboy
and Harriett breaking the silence of the small-town summer
night until Aunt Hager interrupted:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You-all better wind up, chillens, ’cause I wants to go to
bed. I ain’t used to stayin’ ’wake so late, nohow. Play something
kinder decent there, son, fo’ you stops.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy, to tease the old woman, began to rock and moan
like an elder in the Sanctified Church, patting both feet at
the same time as he played a hymn-like, lugubrious tune
with a dancing overtone:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Tell me, sister,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Tell me, brother,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Have you heard de latest news?</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Then seriously as if he were about to announce the coming
of the Judgment:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>A woman down in Georgia</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Got her two sweet-men confused.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>How terrible! How sad! moaned the guitar.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>One knocked on de front do’</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>One knocked on de back—</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Sad, sad .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. sad, sad! said the music.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Now that woman down in Georgia’s</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Door-knob is hung with black.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>O, play that funeral march, boy! while the guitar laughed
a dirge.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ de hearse is comin’ easy</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>With two rubber-tired hacks!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Followed by a long-out, churchlike:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Amen .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. !</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Then with rapid glides, groans, and shouts the instrument
screamed of a sudden in profane frenzy, and Harriett
began to ball-the-jack, her arms flopping like the wings of a
headless pigeon, the guitar string whining in ecstasy, the
player rocking gaily to the urgent music, his happy mouth
crying: “Tack ’em on down, gal! Tack ’em on down, Harrie!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Annjee had risen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish you’d come in and eat the ham I brought you,” she
said as she picked up her chair and started towards the
house. “And you, Sandy! Get up from under that tree and
go to bed.” She spoke roughly to the little fellow, whom the
songs had set a-dreaming. Then to her husband: “Jimboy, I
wish you’d come in.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man stopped playing, with a deep vibration of the
strings that seemed to echo through the whole world. Then
he leaned his guitar against the side of the house and lifted
straight up in his hairy arms Annjee’s plump, brown-black
little body while he kissed her as she wriggled like a stubborn
child, her soft breasts rubbing his hard body through
the coarse blue shirt.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You don’t like my old songs, do you, baby? You don’t
want to hear me sing ’em,” he said, laughing. “Well, that’s
all right. I like you, anyhow, and I like your ham, and I like
your kisses, and I like everything you bring me. Let’s go in
and chow down.” And he carried her into the kitchen,
where he sat with her on his knees as he ate the food she so
faithfully had brought him from Mrs. J. J. Rice’s dinner-table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Outside, Willie-Mae went running home through the
dark. And Harriett pumped a cool drink of water for her
mother, then helped her to rise from her low seat, Sandy
aiding from behind, with both hands pushing firmly in
Aunt Hager’s fleshy back. Then the three of them came
into the house and glanced, as they passed through the
kitchen, at Annjee sitting on Jimboy’s lap with both dark
arms tight around his neck.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Looks like you’re clinging to the Rock of Ages,” said
Harriett to her sister. “Be sure you don’t slip, old evil gal!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But at midnight, when the owl that nested in a tree near
the corner began to hoot, they were all asleep—Annjee and
Jimboy in one room, Harriett and Hager in another, with
Sandy on the floor at the foot of his grandmother’s bed. Far
away on the railroad line a whistle blew, lonesome and long.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap06'>CHAPTER VI</h1></div>

<h3>Work</h3>

<p class='pindent'>The sunflowers in Willie-Mae’s back yard were taller than
Tom Johnson’s head, and the hollyhocks in the fence corners
were almost as high. The nasturtiums, blood-orange
and gold, tumbled over themselves all around Madam de
Carter’s house. Aunt Hager’s sweet-william, her pinks, and
her tiger-lilies were abloom and the apples on her single
tree would soon be ripe. The adjoining yards of the three
neighbors were gay with flowers. “Watch out for them
dogs!” his grandmother told Sandy hourly, for the days had
come when the bright heat made gentle animals go mad.
Bees were heavy with honey, great green flies hummed
through the air, yellow-black butterflies suckled at the rambling
roses .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and watermelons were on the market.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Royal African Knights and Ladies of King
Solomon’s Scepter were preparing a drill for the September
Emancipation celebration, a “Drill of All Nations,” in
which Annjee was to represent Sweden. It was not to be
given for a month or more, but the first rehearsal would
take place tonight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sandy,” his mother said, shaking him early in the morning
as he lay on his pallet at the foot of Aunt Hager’s bed,
“listen here! I want you to come out to Mis’ Rice’s this
evening and help me get through the dishes so’s I can start
home early, in time to wash and dress myself to go to the
lodge hall. You hears me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m,” said Sandy, keeping his eyes closed to the bright
stream of morning sunlight entering the window. But half
an hour later, when Jimboy kicked him and said: “Hey, bo!
You wanta go fishin’?” he got up at once, slid into his pants;
and together they went out in the garden to dig worms. It
was seldom that his father took him anywhere, and, of
course, he wanted to go. Sandy adored Jimboy, but Jimboy,
amiable and indulgent though he was, did not often care to
be bothered with his ten-year-old son on his fishing expeditions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett had gone to her job, and Hager had long been at
the tubs under the apple-tree when the two males emerged
from the kitchen-door. “Huh! You ain’t workin’ this
mawnin’, is you?” the old woman grunted, bending steadily
down, then up, over the wash-board.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nope,” her tall son-in-law answered. “Donahoe laid me
off yesterday on account o’ the white bricklayers said they
couldn’t lay bricks with a nigger.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Always something to keep you from workin’,” panted
Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure is,” agreed Jimboy pleasantly. “But don’t worry, me
and Sandy’s gonna catch you a mess o’ fish for supper today.
How’s that, ma?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t need no fish,” the old woman answered. “An’
don’t come ma-in’ me! Layin’ round here fishin’ when you
ought to be out makin’ money to take care o’ this house an’
that chile o’ your’n.” The suds rose foamy white about her
black arms as the clothes plushed up and down on the zinc
wash-board. “Lawd deliver me from a lazy darky!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Jimboy and Sandy were already behind the tall corn,
digging for bait near the back fence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t never let no one woman worry you,” said the boy’s
father softly, picking the moist wriggling worms from the
upturned loam. “Treat ’em like chickens, son. Throw ’em a
little corn and they’ll run after you, but don’t give ’em too
much. If you do, they’ll stop layin’ and expect you to wait on
’em.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will they?” asked Sandy.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>The warm afternoon sun made the river a languid sheet
of muddy gold, glittering away towards the bridge and the
flour-mills a mile and a half off. Here in the quiet, on the
end of a rotting jetty among the reeds, Jimboy and his son
sat silently. A long string of small silver fish hung down into
the water, keeping fresh, and the fishing-lines were flung
far out in the stream, waiting for more bites. Not a breeze
on the flat brown-gold river, not a ripple, not a sound. But
once the train came by behind them, pouring out a great
cloud of smoke and cinders and shaking the jetty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s Number Five,” said Jimboy. “Sure is flyin’,” as the
train disappeared between rows of empty box-cars far down
the track, sending back a hollow clatter as it shot past the
flour-mills, whose stacks could be dimly seen through the
heat haze. Once the engine’s whistle moaned shrilly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s gone now,” said Jimboy, as the last click of the
wheels died away. And, except for the drone of a green fly
about the can of bait, there was again no sound to disturb
the two fishermen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy gazed at his lines. Across the river Sandy could
make out, in the brilliant sunlight, the gold of wheat-fields
and the green of trees on the hills. He wondered if it would
be nice to live over there in the country.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Man alive!” his father cried suddenly, hauling vigorously
at one of the lines. “Sure got a real bite now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Look at
this catfish.” From the water he pulled a large flopping lead-colored
creature, with a fierce white mouth bleeding and
gaping over the hook.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s on my line!” yelled Sandy. “I caught him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Pshaw!” laughed Jimboy. “You was setting there dreaming.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, I wasn’t!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But just then, at the mills, the five-o’clock whistles blew.
“Oh, gee, dad!” cried the boy, frightened. “I was s’posed to
go to Mis’ Rice’s to help mama, and I come near forgetting
it. She wants to get through early this evenin’ to go to lodge
meeting. I gotta hurry and go help her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, you better beat it then, and I’ll look out for your
line like I been doing and bring the fishes home.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So the little fellow balanced himself across the jetty,
scrambled up the bank, and ran down the railroad track towards
town. He was quite out of breath when he reached
the foot of Penrose Street, with Mrs. Rice’s house still ten
blocks away, so he walked awhile, then ran again, down the
long residential street, with its large houses sitting in green
shady lawns far back from the sidewalk. Sometimes a sprinkler,
attached to a long rubber hose, sprayed fountain-like
jets of cold water on the thirsty grass. In one yard three
golden-haired little girls were playing under an elm-tree,
and in another a man and some children were having a
leisurely game of croquet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Finally Sandy turned into a big yard. The delicious scent
of frying beefsteak greeted the sweating youngster as he
reached the screen of the white lady’s kitchen-door. Inside,
Annjee was standing over the hot stove seasoning something
in a saucepan, beads of perspiration on her dark face,
and large damp spots under the arms of her dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You better get here!” she said. “And me waiting for you
for the last hour. Here, take this pick and break some ice for
the tea.” Sandy climbed up on a stool and raised the ice-box
lid while his mother opened the oven and pulled out a pan
of golden-brown biscuits. “Made these for your father,” she
remarked. “The white folks ain’t asked for ’em, but they like
’em, too, so they can serve for both.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jimboy’s crazy
about biscuits.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Did he work today?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No’m,” said Sandy, jabbing at the ice. “We went fishing.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that moment Mrs. Rice came into the kitchen, tall and
blond, in a thin flowered gown. She was a middle-aged
white woman with a sharp nasal voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Annjee, I’d like the potatoes served just as they are in the
casserole. And make several slices of very thin toast for my
father. Now, be sure they <span class='it'>are</span> thin!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, ma’am,” said Annjee stirring a spoonful of flour into
the frying-pan, making a thick brown gravy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Old thin toast,” muttered Annjee when Mrs. Rice had
gone back to the front. “Always bothering round the
kitchen! Here ’tis lodge-meeting night—dinner late anyhow—and
she coming telling me to stop and make toast for
the old man! He ain’t too indigestible to eat biscuits like the
rest of ’em.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. White folks sure is a case!” She laid three
slices of bread on top of the stove. “So spoiled with colored
folks waiting on ’em all their days! Don’t know what they’ll
do in heaven, ’cause I’m gonna sit down up there myself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee took the biscuits, light and brown, and placed
some on a pink plate she had warmed. She carried them,
with the butter and jelly, into the dining-room. Then she
took the steak from the warmer, dished up the vegetables
into gold-rimmed serving-dishes, and poured the gravy,
which smelled deliciously onion-flavored.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee, I’m hungry,” said the child, with his eyes on the big
steak ready to go in to the white people.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, just wait,” replied his mother. “You come to work,
not to eat.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Whee! but it’s hot today!” She wiped her wet
face and put on a large white bungalow apron that had been
hanging behind the door. Then she went with the iced tea
and a pitcher of water into the dining-room, struck a Chinese
gong, and came back to the kitchen to get the dishes of
steaming food, which she carried in to the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was some time before she returned from waiting on the
table; so Sandy, to help her, began to scrape out the empty
pans and put them to soak in the sink. He ate the stewed
corn that had stuck in the bottom of one, and rubbed a
piece of bread in the frying-pan where the gravy had been.
His mother came out with the water-pitcher, broke some
ice for it, and returned to the dining-room where Sandy
could hear laughter, and the clinking of spoons in tea-glasses,
and women talking. When Annjee came back into
the kitchen, she took four custards from the ice-box and
placed them on gold-rimmed plates.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’re about through,” she said to her son. “Sit down
and I’ll fix you up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy was very hungry and he hoped Mrs. Rice’s family
hadn’t eaten all the steak, which had looked so good with its
brown gravy and onions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Shortly, his mother returned carrying the dishes that had
been filled with hot food. She placed them on the kitchen-table
in front of Sandy, but they were no longer full and no
longer hot. The corn had thickened to a paste, and the potatoes
were about gone; but there was still a ragged piece of
steak left on the platter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t eat it all,” said Annjee warningly. “I want to take
some home to your father.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The bell rang in the dining-room. Annjee went through
the swinging door and returned bearing a custard that had
been but little touched.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here, sonny—the old man says it’s too sweet for his
stomach, so you can have this.” She set the yellow corn-starch
before Sandy. “He’s seen these ripe peaches out here
today and he wants some, that’s all. More trouble than he’s
worth, po’ old soul, and me in a hurry!” She began to peel
the fruit. “Just like a chile, ’deed he is!” she added, carrying
the sliced peaches into the dining-room and leaving Sandy
with a plate of food before him, eating slowly. “When you
rushing to get out, seems like white folks tries theirselves.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In a moment she returned, ill-tempered, and began to
scold Sandy for taking so long with his meal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I asked you to help me so’s I can get to the lodge on
time, and you just set and chew and eat! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Here, wipe
these dishes, boy!” Annjee began hurriedly to lay plates in a
steaming row on the shelf of the sink; so Sandy got up and,
between mouthfuls of pudding, wiped them with a large
dish-towel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Soon Mrs. Rice came into the kitchen again, briskly,
through the swinging door and glanced about her. Sandy
felt ashamed for the white woman to see him eating a leftover
pudding from her table, so he put the spoon down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Annjee,” the mistress said sharply. “I wish you wouldn’t
put quite so much onion in your sauce for the steak. I’ve
mentioned it to you several times before, and you know
very well we don’t like it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, ma’am,” said Annjee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And do <span class='it'>please</span> be careful that our drinking water is cold
before meals are served.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You were certainly careless
tonight. You must think more about what you are doing,
Annjee.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Rice went out again through the swinging door, but
Sandy stood near the sink with a burning face and eyes that
had suddenly filled with angry tears. He couldn’t help it—hearing
his sweating mother reprimanded by this tall white
woman in the flowered dress. Black, hard-working Annjee
answered: “Yes, ma’am,” and that was all—but Sandy cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dry up,” his mother said crossly when she saw him,
thinking he was crying because she had asked him to work.
“What’s come over you, anyway?—can’t even wipe a few
plates for me and act nice about it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He didn’t answer. When the dining-room had been
cleared and the kitchen put in order, Annjee told him to
empty the garbage while she wrapped in newspapers several
little bundles of food to carry to Jimboy. Then they went
out the back door, around the big house to the street, and
trudged the fourteen blocks to Aunt Hager’s, taking short
cuts through alleys, passing under arc-lights that sputtered
whitely in the deepening twilight, and greeting with an occasional
“Howdy” other poor colored folks also coming
home from work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How are you, Sister Jones?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Right smart, I thank yuh!” as they passed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once Annjee spoke to her son. “Evening’s the only time
we niggers have to ourselves!” she said. “Thank God for
night .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ’cause all day you gives to white folks.”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap07'>CHAPTER VII</h1></div>

<h3>White Folks</h3>

<p class='pindent'>When they got home, Aunt Hager was sitting in the cool of
the evening on her new porch, which had been rebuilt for
thirty-five dollars added to the mortgage. The old woman
was in her rocking-chair, with Jimboy, one foot on the
ground and his back against a pillar, lounging at her feet.
The two were quarrelling amicably over nothing as Annjee
and Sandy approached.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-evenin’, you-all,” said Annjee. “I brought you a
nice piece o’ steak, Jimboy-sugar, and some biscuits to go
with it. Come on in and eat while I get dressed to go to the
drill practice. I got to hurry.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We don’t want no steak now,” Jimboy answered without
moving. “Aunt Hager and me had fresh fish for supper and
egg-corn-bread and we’re full. We don’t need nothin’
more.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” said Annjee disappointedly. “Well, come on in
anyhow, honey, and talk while I get dressed.” So he rose
lazily and followed his wife into the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Shortly, Sister Johnson, pursued by the ever-present
Willie-Mae, came through the blue-grey darkness from
next door. “Good-evenin’, Sister Williams; how you been
today?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tolable,” answered Hager, “ ’ceptin’ I’s tired out from
washin’ an’ rinsin’. Have a seat.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You Sandy, go in de
house an’ get Sister Johnson a settin’-chair.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Where’s
Tom?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawd, chile, he done gone to bed long ago. That there
sewer-diggin’ job ain’t so good fer a man old as Tom. He
’bout played out.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I done washed fer Mis’ Cohn maself
today.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Umh! dis cheer feels good! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Looked like to me
she had near ’bout fifty babies’ diddies in de wash. You
know she done got twins, ’sides dat young-’un born last
year.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The conversation of the two old women rambled on as
their grandchildren ran across the front yard laughing,
shrieking, wrestling; catching fire-flies and watching them
glow in closed fists, then releasing them to twinkle in the
sultry night-air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett came singing out of the house and sat down on
the edge of the porch. “Lord, it’s hot! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. How are you, Mis’
Johnson? I didn’t see you in the dark.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jest tolable, chile,” said the old woman, “but I can’t kick.
Honey, when you gits old as I is, you’ll be doin’ well if you’s
livin’ a-tall, de way you chillens runs round now days! How
come you ain’t out to some party dis evenin’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, there’s no party tonight,” said Harriett laughing.
“Besides, this new job of mine’s a heartbreaker, Mis’ Johnson.
I got to stay home and rest now. I’m kitchen-girl at that
New Albert Restaurant, and time you get through wrestling
with pots and arguing with white waitresses and colored
cooks, you don’t feel much like running out at night. But
the shifts aren’t bad, though, food’s good, and—well, you
can’t expect everything.” She shrugged her shoulders
against the two-by-four pillar on which her back rested.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Long’s it keeps you off de streets, I’s glad,” said Hager,
rocking contentedly. “Maybe I can git you goin’ to church
agin now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, I don’t like church,” the girl replied.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An’, chile, I can’t blame you much,” said Sister Johnson,
fumbling in the pocket of her apron. “De way dese churches
done got now days.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy, run in de house an’ ask yo’
pappy fo’ a match to light ma pipe.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It ain’t ‘Come to Jesus’
no mo’ a-tall. Ministers dese days an’ times don’t care
nothin’ ’bout po’ Jesus. ’Stead o’ dat it’s rally dis an’ collection
dat, an’ de aisle wants a new carpet, an’ de pastor needs
a ’lectric fan fer his red-hot self.” The old sister spat into the
yard. “Money! That’s all ’tis! An’ white folkses’ religion—Lawd
help! ’Taint no use in mentionin’ them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“True,” agreed Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Cause if de gates o’ heaven shuts in white folkses’ faces
like de do’s o’ dey church in us niggers’ faces, it’ll be too
bad! Yes, sir! One thing sho, de Lawd ain’t prejudiced!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” said Hager; “but He don’t love ugly, neither in niggers
nor in white folks.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now, talking about white folks’ religion,” said Annjee,
emerging from the house with a fresh white dress on, “why,
Mis’ Rice where I work don’t think no more about playing
bridge on Sunday than she does about praying—and I ain’t
never seen her pray yet.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re nuts,” said Jimboy behind her. “People’s due to
have a little fun on Sundays. That’s what’s the matter with
colored folks now—work all week and then set up in church
all day Sunday, and don’t even know what’s goin’ on in the
rest of the world.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Huh!” grunted Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, we won’t argue, daddy.” Annjee smiled. “Come on
and walk a piece with me, sweetness. Here ’tis nearly nine
and I should a been at the hall at eight, but colored folks are
always behind the clock. Come on, Jimboy.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-bye, mama,” yelled Sandy from the lawn as his
parents strolled up the street together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jimboy’s right,” said Harriett. “Darkies do like the
church too much, but white folks don’t care nothing about
it at all. They’re too busy getting theirs out of this world,
not from God. And I don’t blame ’em, except that they’re so
mean to niggers. They’re right, though, looking out for
themselves .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and yet I hate ’em for it. They don’t have to
mistreat us besides, do they?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Honey, don’t talk that way,” broke in Hager. “It ain’t
Christian, chile. If you don’t like ’em, pray for ’em, but
don’t feel evil against ’em. I was in slavery, Harrie, an’ I been
knowin’ white folks all ma life, an’ they’s good as far as they
can see—but when it comes to po’ niggers, they just can’t
see far, that’s all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett opened her mouth to reply, but Jimboy, who left
Annjee at the corner and had returned to the porch, beat
her to it. “We too dark for ’em, ma,” he laughed. “How they
gonna see in the dark? You colored folks oughta get lighter,
that’s what!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shut up yo’ mouth, you yaller rooster!” said Sister Johnson.
“White folks is white folks, an’ dey’s mean! I can’t help
what Hager say,” the old woman disagreed emphatically
with her crony. “Ain’t I been knowin’ crackers sixty-five
years, an’ ain’t dey de cause o’ me bein’ here in Stanton
’stead o’ in ma home right today? De dirty buzzards! Ain’t I
nussed t’ree of ’em up from babies like ma own chillens, and
ain’t dem same t’ree boys done turned round an’ helped run
me an’ Tom out o’ town?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old sister took a long draw on her corn-cob pipe,
and a fiery red spot glowed in its bowl, while Willie-Mae
and Sandy stopped playing and sat down on the porch as
she began a tale they had all heard at least a dozen times.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’s tole you ’bout it befo’, ain’t I?” asked Sister Johnson.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not me,” lied Jimboy, who was anxious to keep her going.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, you haven’t,” Harriett assured her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, it were like dis,” and the story unwound itself, the
preliminary details telling how, as a young freed-girl after
the Civil War, Sister Johnson had gone into service for a
white planter’s family in a Mississippi town near Vicksburg.
While attached to this family, she married Tom Johnson,
then a fieldhand, and raised five children of her own during
the years that followed, besides caring for three boys belonging
to her white mistress, nursing them at her black
breasts and sometimes leaving her own young ones in the
cabin to come and stay with her white charges when they
were ill. These called her mammy, too, and when they were
men and married, she still went to see them and occasionally
worked for their families.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now, we niggers all lived at de edge o’ town in what de
whites called Crowville, an’ most of us owned little houses
an’ farms, an’ we did right well raisin’ cotton an’ sweet
’taters an’ all. Now, dat’s where de trouble started! We was
doin’ too well, an’ de white folks said so! But we ain’t paid
’em no ’tention, jest thought dey was talkin’ fer de pastime
of it.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, we all started fixin’ up our houses an’
paintin’ our fences, an’ Crowville looked kinder decent-like
when de white folks ’gin to ’mark, so’s we servants could
hear ’em, ’bout niggers livin’ in painted houses an’ dressin’
fine like we was somebody! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, dat went on fer some
time wid de whites talkin’ an’ de coloreds doin’ better’n better
year by year, sellin’ mo’ cotton ever’ day an’ gittin’ nice
furniture an’ buyin’ pianers, till by an’ by a prosp’rous nigger
named John Lowdins up an’ bought one o’ dese here
new autimobiles—an’ dat settled it! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. A white man in
town one Sat’day night tole John to git out o’ dat damn car
’cause a nigger ain’t got no business wid a autimobile nohow!
An’ John say: ‘I ain’t gonna git out!’ Den de white
man, what’s been drinkin’, jump up on de runnin’-bo’ad an’
bust John in de mouth fer talkin’ back to him—he a white
man, an’ Lowdins nothin’ but a nigger. ‘De very idee!’ he
say, and hit John in de face six or seven times. Den John
drawed his gun! One! two! t’ree! he fiah, hit dis old redneck
cracker in de shoulder, but he ain’t dead! Ain’t nothin’
meant to kill a cracker what’s drunk! But John think he done
kilt this white man, an’ so he left him kickin’ in de street
while he runs that car o’ his’n lickety-split out o’ town, goes
to Vicksburg, an’ catches de river boat.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, sir! Dat
night Crowville’s plumb full o’ white folks wid dogs an’
guns an’ lanterns, shoutin’ an’ yellin’ an’ scarin’ de wits out
o’ us coloreds an’ waitin’ us up way late in de night-time
lookin’ fer John, an’ dey don’t find him.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Den dey say dey
gwine teach dem Crowville niggers a lesson, all of ’em,
paintin’ dey houses an’ buyin’ cars an’ livin’ like white folks,
so dey comes to our do’s an’ tells us to leave our houses—git
de hell out in de fields, ’cause dey don’t want to kill nobody
there dis evenin’! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, sir! Niggers in night-gowns an’
underwear an’ shimmies, half-naked an’ barefooted, was
runnin’ ever’ which way in de dark, scratchin’ up dey legs in
de briah patches, failin’ on dey faces, scared to death! Po’
ole Pheeny, what ain’t moved from her bed wid de paralytics
fo’ six years, dey made her daughters carry her out,
screamin’ an’ wall-eyed, an’ set her in de middle o’ de
cotton-patch. An’ Brian, what was sleepin’ naked, jumps up
an’ grabs his wife’s apron and runs like a rabbit with not another
blessed thing on! Chillens squallin’ ever’where, an’
mens a-pleadin’ an’ a-cussin’, an’ womens cryin’
‘Lawd’a’Mercy’ wid de whites of dey eyes showin’! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Den
looked like to me ’bout five hundred white men took
torches an’ started burnin’ wid fiah ever’ last house, an’ henhouse,
an’ shack, an’ barn, an’ privy, an’ shed, an’ cow-slant
in de place! An’ all de niggers, when de fiah blaze up, was
moanin’ in de fields, callin’ on de Lawd fer help! An’ de fiah
light up de whole country clean back to de woods! You
could smell fiah, an’ you could see it red, an’ taste de smoke,
an’ feel it stingin’ yo’ eyes. An’ you could hear de bo’ads a-fallin’
an’ de glass a-poppin’, an’ po’ animals roastin’ an’
fryin’ an’ a-tearin’ at dey halters. An’ one cow run out, fiah
all ovah, wid her milk streamin’ down. An’ de smoke roll up,
de cotton-fields were red .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. an’ dey ain’t been no mo’
Crowville after dat night. No, sir! De white folks ain’t left
nothin’ fer de niggers, not nary bo’ad standin’ one ’bove another,
not even a dog-house.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. When it were done—nothin’
but ashes! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. De white mens was ever’where wid
guns, scarin’ de po’ blacks an’ keepin’ ’em off, an’ one of ’em
say: ‘I got good mind to try yo’-all’s hide, see is it bullet
proof—gittin’ so prosp’rous, paintin’ yo’ houses an’ runnin
ovah white folks wid yo’ damn gasoline buggies! Well, after
dis you’ll damn sight have to bend yo’ backs an’ work a little!’
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Dat’s what de white man say.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But we didn’t—not
yit! ’Cause ever’ last nigger moved from there dat Sunday
mawnin’. It were right funny to see ole folks what ain’t
never been out o’ de backwoods pickin’ up dey feet an’ goin’.
Ma Bailey say: ‘De Lawd done let me live eighty years in
one place, but ma next eighty’ll be spent in St. Louis.’ An’
she started out walkin’ wid neither bag nor baggage.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’
me an’ Tom took Willie-Mae an’ went to Cairo, an’ Tom
started railroad-workin’ wid a gang; then we come on up
here, been five summers ago dis August. We ain’t had not
even a rag o’ clothes when we left Crowville—so don’t tell
me ’bout white folks bein’ good, Hager, ’cause I knows
’em.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Yes, indeedy, I really knows ’em.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Dey done
made us leave our home.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old woman knocked her pipe against the edge of the
porch, emptying its dead ashes into the yard, and for a moment
no one spoke. Sandy, trembling, watched a falling star
drop behind the trees. Then Jimboy’s deep voice, like a bitter
rumble in the dark, broke the silence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know white folks, too,” he said. “I lived in the South.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And I ain’t never been South,” added Harriett hoarsely,
“but I know ’em right here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I hate ’em!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“De Lawd hears you,” said Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t care if He does hear me, mama! You and Annjee
are too easy. You just take whatever white folks give you—<span class='it'>coon</span>
to your face, and <span class='it'>nigger</span> behind your backs—and don’t
say nothing. You run to some white person’s back door for
every job you get, and then they pay you one dollar for five
dollars’ worth of work, and fire you whenever they get
ready.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They do that all right,” said Jimboy. “They don’t mind
firin’ you. Wasn’t I layin’ brick on the <span class='it'>Daily Leader</span> building
and the white union men started sayin’ they couldn’t work
with me because I wasn’t in the union? So the boss come up
and paid me off. ‘Good man, too,’ he says to me, ‘but I can’t
buck the union.’ So I said I’d join, but I knew they wouldn’t
let me before I went to the office. Anyhow, I tried. I told the
guys there I was a bricklayer and asked ’em how I was gonna
work if I couldn’t be in the union. And the fellow who had
the cards, secretary I guess he was, says kinder sharp, like he
didn’t want to be bothered: ‘That’s your look-out, big boy,
not mine.’ So you see how much the union cares if a black
man works or not.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ain’t Tom had de same trouble?” affirmed Sister Johnson.
“Got put off de job mo’n once on ’count o’ de white
unions.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, they’ve got us cornered, all right,” said Jimboy. “The
white folks are like farmers that own all the cows and let the
niggers take care of ’em. Then they make you pay a sweet
price for skimmed milk and keep the cream for themselves—but
I reckon cream’s too rich for rusty-kneed niggers
anyhow!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They laughed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s a good one!” said Harriett. “You know old man
Wright, what owns the flour-mill and the new hotel—how
he made his start off colored women working in his canning
factory? Well, when he built that orphan home for colored
and gave it to the city last year, he had the whole place made
just about the size of the dining-room at his own house.
They got the little niggers in that asylum cooped up like
chickens. And the reason he built it was to get the colored
babies out of the city home, with its nice playgrounds, because
he thinks the two races oughtn’t to mix! But he don’t
care how hard he works his colored help in that canning
factory of his, does he? Wasn’t I there thirteen hours a day
in tomato season? Nine cents an hour and five cents overtime
after ten hours—and you better work overtime if you
want to keep the job! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. As for the races mixing—ask some
of those high yellow women who work there. They know a
mighty lot about the races mixing!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Most of ’em lives in de Bottoms, where de sportin’
houses are,” said Hager. “It’s a shame de way de white mens
keeps them sinful places goin’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It ain’t Christian, is it?” mocked Harriett.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “White
folks!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And she shrugged her shoulders scornfully.
Many disagreeable things had happened to her through
white folks. Her first surprising and unpleasantly lasting
impression of the pale world had come when, at the age of
five, she had gone alone one day to play in a friendly white
family’s yard. Some mischievous small boys there, for the
fun of it, had taken hold of her short kinky braids and
pulled them, dancing round and round her and yelling:
“Blackie! Blackie! Blackie!” while she screamed and tried to
run away. But they held her and pulled her hair terribly, and
her friends laughed because she <span class='it'>was</span> black and she <span class='it'>did</span> look
funny. So from that time on, Harriett had been uncomfortable
in the presence of whiteness, and that early hurt had
grown with each new incident into a rancor that she could
not hide and a dislike that had become pain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Now, because she could sing and dance and was always
amusing, many of the white girls in high school were her
friends. But when the three-thirty bell rang and it was time
to go home, Harriett knew their polite “Good-bye” was really
a kind way of saying: “We can’t be seen on the streets
with a colored girl.” To loiter with these same young ladies
had been all right during their grade-school years, when
they were all younger, but now they had begun to feel the
eyes of young white boys staring from the windows of pool
halls, or from the tennis-courts near the park—so it was not
proper to be seen with Harriett.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But a very unexpected stab at the girl’s pride had come
only a few weeks ago when she had gone with her classmates,
on tickets issued by the school, to see an educational
film of the under-sea world at the Palace Theatre, on Main
Street. It was a special performance given for the students,
and each class had had seats allotted to them beforehand; so
Harriett sat with her class and had begun to enjoy immensely
the strange wonders of the ocean depths when an
usher touched her on the shoulder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The last three rows on the left are for colored,” the girl
in the uniform said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I—But—But I’m with my class,” Harriett stammered.
“We’re all supposed to sit here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t help it,” insisted the usher, pointing towards the
rear of the theatre, while her voice carried everywhere.
“Them’s the house rules. No argument now—you’ll have to
move.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So Harriett rose and stumbled up the dark aisle and out
into the sunlight, her slender body hot with embarrassment
and rage. The teacher saw her leave the theatre without a
word of protest, and none of her white classmates defended
her for being black. They didn’t care.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All white people are alike, in school and out,” Harriett
concluded bitterly, as she told of her experiences to the
folks sitting with her on the porch in the dark.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once, when she had worked for a Mrs. Leonard Baker on
Martin Avenue, she accidentally broke a precious cut-glass
pitcher used to serve some out-of-town guests. And when
she tried to apologize for the accident, Mrs. Baker screamed
in a rage: “Shut up, you impudent little black wench! Talking
back to me after breaking up my dishes. All you darkies
are alike—careless sluts—and I wouldn’t have a one of you
in my house if I could get anybody else to work for me without
paying a fortune. You’re all impossible.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So that’s the way white people feel,” Harriett said to
Aunt Hager and Sister Johnson and Jimboy, while the two
children listened. “They wouldn’t have a single one of us
around if they could help it. It don’t matter to them if we’re
shut out of a job. It don’t matter to them if niggers have only
the back row at the movies. It don’t matter to them when
they hurt our feelings without caring and treat us like slaves
down South and like beggars up North. No, it don’t matter
to them.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. White folks run the world, and the only thing
colored folks are expected to do is work and grin and take
off their hats as though it don’t matter.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O, I hate ’em!”
Harriett cried, so fiercely that Sandy was afraid. “I hate
white folks!” she said to everybody on the porch in the
darkness. “You can pray for ’em if you want to, mama, but I
hate ’em! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I hate white folks! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I hate ’em all!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap08'>CHAPTER VIII</h1></div>

<h3>Dance</h3>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. J. J. Rice and family usually spent ten days during the
August heat at Lake Dale, and thither they had gone now,
giving Annjee a forced vacation with no pay. Jimboy was not
working, and so his wife found ten days of rest without income
not especially agreeable. Nevertheless, she decided
that she might as well enjoy the time; so she and Jimboy
went to the country for a week with Cousin Jessie, who had
married one of the colored farmers of the district. Besides,
Annjee thought that Jimboy might help on the farm and so
make a little money. Anyway, they would get plenty to eat,
because Jessie kept a good table. And since Jessie had eight
children of her own, they did not take Sandy with them—eight
were enough for a woman to be worried with at one
time!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager had been ironing all day on the Reinharts’
clothes—it was Friday. At seven o’clock Harriett came
home, but she had already eaten her supper at the restaurant
where she worked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hello, mama! Hy, Sandy!” she said, but that was all, because
she and her mother were not on the best of terms.
Aunt Hager was attempting to punish her youngest daughter
by not allowing her to leave the house after dark, since
Harriett, on Tuesday night, had been out until one o’clock
in the morning with no better excuse than a party at
Maudel’s. Aunt Hager had threatened to whip her then and
there that night.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You ain’t had a switch on yo’ hide fo’ three years, but
don’t think you’s gettin’ too big fo’ me not to fan yo’ behind,
madam. ‘Spare de rod an’ spoil de chile,’ that’s what de Bible
say, an’ Lawd knows you sho is spoiled! De idee of a young
gal yo’ age stayin’ out till one o’clock in de mawnin’, an’ me
not knowed where you’s at.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Don’t you talk back to
me! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You rests in this house ever’ night this week an’
don’t put yo’ foot out o’ this yard after you comes from
work, that’s what you do. Lawd knows I don’t know what I’s
gonna do with you. I works fo’ you an’ I prays fo’ you, an’ if
you don’t mind, I’s sho gonna whip you, even if you is goin’
on seventeen years old!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tonight as soon as she came from work Harriett went
into her mother’s room and lay across the bed. It was very
warm in the little four-room house, and all the windows and
doors were open.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’s got some watermelon here, daughter,” Hager
called from the kitchen. “Don’t you want a nice cool slice?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” the girl replied. She was fanning herself with a
palm-leaf fan, her legs in their cheap silk stockings hanging
over the side of the bed, and her heels kicking the floor.
Benbow’s Band played tonight for the dance at Chaver’s
Hall, and everybody was going—but her. Gee, it was hard to
have a Christian mother! Harriett kicked her slippers off
with a bang and rolled over on her stomach, burying her
powdery face in the pillows.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Somebody knocked at the
back door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A boy’s voice was speaking excitedly to Hager: “Hemorrhages
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and papa can’t stop ’em .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. she’s coughin’ something
terrible .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. says can’t you please come over and help
him”—frightened and out of breath.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do, Jesus!” cried Hager. “I’ll be with you right away,
chile. Don’t worry.” She rushed into the bedroom to change
her apron. “You, Harriett, listen; Sister Lane’s taken awful
sick an’ Jimmy says she’s bleedin’ from de mouth. If I ain’t
back by nine o’clock, see that that chile Sandy’s in de bed.
An’ you know you ain’t to leave this yard under no circumstances.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Po’ Mis’ Lane! She sho do have it hard.” In a
whisper: “I ’spects she’s got de T.B., that what I ’spects!”
And the old woman hustled out to join the waiting youngster.
Jimmy was leaning against the door, looking at Sandy,
and neither of the boys knew what to say. Jimmy Lane wore
his mother’s cast-off shoes to school, and Sandy used to
tease him, but tonight he didn’t tease his friend about his
shoes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You go to bed ’fore it gets late,” said his grandmother,
starting down the alley with Jimmy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m,” Sandy called after her. “So long, Jim!” He stood
under the apple-tree and watched them disappear.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager had scarcely gotten out of sight when there
was a loud knock at the front door, and Sandy ran around
the house to see Harriett’s boy friend, Mingo, standing in
the dusk outside the screen-door, waiting to be let in.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mingo was a patent-leather black boy with wide, alive
nostrils and a mouth that split into a lighthouse smile on
the least provocation. His body was heavy and muscular,
resting on bowed legs that curved backward as though the
better to brace his chunky torso; and his hands were hard
from mixing concrete and digging ditches for the city’s new
water-mains.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know it’s tonight, but I can’t go,” Sandy heard his aunt
say at the door. They were speaking of Benbow’s dance.
“And his band don’t come here often, neither. I’m heartsick
having to stay home, dog-gone it all, especially this
evening!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, come on and go anyway,” pleaded Mingo. “After I
been savin’ up my dough for two weeks to take you, and got
my suit cleaned and pressed and all. Heck! If you couldn’t
go and knew it yesterday, why didn’t you tell me? That’s a
swell way to treat a fellow!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Because I wanted to go,” said Harriett; “and still want to
go.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Don’t make so much difference about mama, because
she’s mad anyhow .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but what could we do with this
kid? We can’t leave him by himself.” She looked at Sandy,
who was standing behind Mingo listening to everything.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You can take me,” the child offered anxiously, his eyes
dancing at the delightful prospect. “I’ll behave, Harrie, if
you take me, and I won’t tell on you either.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Please
lemme go, Mingo. I ain’t never seen a big dance in my life. I
wanta go.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Should we?” asked Harriett doubtfully, looking at her
boy friend standing firmly on his curved legs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure, if we got to have him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. damn ’im!” Mingo
replied. “Better the kid than no dance. Go git dressed.” So
Harriett made a dash for the clothes-closet, while Sandy
ran to get a clean waist from one of his mother’s dresser-drawers,
and Mingo helped him put it on, cussing softly to
himself all the while. “But it ain’t your fault, pal, is it?” he
said to the little boy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure not,” Sandy replied. “I didn’t tell Aunt Hager to
make Harrie stay home. I tried to ’suade grandma to let her
go,” the child lied, because he liked Mingo. “I guess she
won’t care about her goin’ to just one dance.” He wanted to
make everything all right so the young man wouldn’t be
worried. Besides, Sandy very much wanted to go himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s beat it,” Harriett shrilled excitedly before her dress
was fastened, anxious to be gone lest her mother come
home. She was powdering her face and neck in the next
room, nervous, happy, and afraid all at once. The perfume,
the voice, and the pat, pat, pat of the powder-puff came out
to the waiting gentleman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yo’ car’s here, madam,” mocked Mingo. “Step right this
way and let’s be going!”</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Wonder where ma easy rider’s gone—</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>He done left me, put ma new gold watch in pawn!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Like a blare from hell the second encore of <span class='it'>Easy Rider</span>
filled every cubic inch of the little hall with hip-rocking
notes. Benbow himself was leading and the crowd moved
like jelly-fish dancing on individual sea-shells, with Mingo
and Harriett somewhere among the shakers. But they were
not of them, since each couple shook in a world of its own,
as, with a weary wail, the music abruptly ceased.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then, after scarcely a breath of intermission, the band
struck up again with a lazy one-step. A tall brown boy in a
light tan suit walked his partner straight down the whole
length of the floor and, when he reached the corner, turned
leisurely in one spot, body riding his hips, eyes on the ceiling,
and his girl shaking her full breasts against his pink silk
shirt. Then they recrossed the width of the room, turned
slowly, repeating themselves, and began again to walk
rhythmically down the hall, while the music was like a lazy
river flowing between mountains, carving a canyon coolly,
calmly, and without insistence. The <span class='it'>Lazy River One-Step</span>
they might have called what the band was playing as the
large crowd moved with the greatest ease about the hall. To
drum-beats barely audible, the tall boy in the tan suit
walked his partner round and round time after time, revolving
at each corner with eyes uplifted, while the piano was
the water flowing, and the high, thin chords of the banjo
were the mountains floating in the clouds. But in sultry
tones, alone and always, the brass cornet spoke harshly
about the earth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy sat against the wall in a hard wooden folding chair.
There were other children scattered lonesomely about on
chairs, too, watching the dancers, but he didn’t seem to
know any of them. When the music stopped, all the chairs
quickly filled with loud-talking women and girls in brightly
colored dresses who fanned themselves with handkerchiefs
and wiped their sweating brows. Sandy thought maybe he
should give his seat to one of the women when he saw
Maudel approaching.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here, honey,” she said. “Take this dime and buy yourself
a bottle of something cold to drink. I know Harriett ain’t
got you on her mind out there dancin’. This music is certainly
righteous, chile!” She laughed as she handed Sandy a
coin and closed her pocketbook. He liked Maudel, although
he knew his grandmother didn’t. She was a large good-natured
brown-skinned girl who walked hippishly and used
too much rouge on her lips. But she always gave Sandy a
dime, and she was always laughing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He went through the crowd towards the soft-drink stand
at the end of the hall. “Gimme a bottle o’ cream soda,” he
said to the fat orange-colored man there, who had his
sleeves rolled up and a white butcher’s apron covering his
barrel-like belly. The man put his hairy arms down into a
zinc tub full of ice and water and began pulling out bottles,
looking at their caps, and then dropping them back into the
cold liquid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t seem like we got no cream, sonny. How’d a lemon
do you?” he asked above the bedlam of talking voices.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Naw,” said Sandy. “It’s too sour.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>On the improvised counter of boards the wares displayed
consisted of cracker-jacks, salted peanuts, a box of gum, and
Sen Sens, while behind the counter was a lighted oil-stove
holding a tin pan full of spareribs, sausage, and fish; and
near it an ice-cream freezer covered with a brown sack.
Some cases of soda were on the floor beside the zinc tub
filled with bottles, in which the man was still searching.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nope, no cream,” said the fat man.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, gimme a fish sandwich then,” Sandy replied, feeling
very proud because some kids were standing near, looking
at him as he made his purchase like a grown man.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Buy me one, too,” suggested a biscuit-colored little girl
in a frilly dirty-white dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I only got a dime,” Sandy said. “But you can have half of
mine.” And he gallantly broke in two parts the double
square of thick bread, with its hunk of greasy fish between,
and gravely handed a portion to the grinning little girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Thanks,” she said, running away with the bread and fish
in her hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shame on you!” teased a small boy, rubbing his forefingers
at Sandy. “You got a girl! You got a girl!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go chase yourself.” Sandy replied casually, as he picked
out the bones and smacked his lips on the sweet fried fish.
The orchestra was playing another one-step, with the
dancers going like shuttles across the floor. Sandy saw his
Aunt Harriett and a slender yellow boy named Billy
Sanderlee doing a series of lazy, intricate steps as they
wound through the crowd from one end of the hall to the
other. Certain less accomplished couples were watching
them with admiration.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy, when he had finished eating, decided to look for
the wash-room, where he could rinse his hands, because
they were greasy and smelled fishy. It was at the far corner
of the hall. As he pushed open the door marked GENTS, a
thick grey cloud of cigarette-smoke drifted out. The stench
of urine and gin and a crowd of men talking, swearing, and
drinking licker surrounded the little boy as he elbowed his
way towards the wash-bowls. All the fellows were shouting
loudly to one another and making fleshy remarks about the
women they had danced with.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Boy, you ought to try Velma,” a mahogany-brown boy
yelled. “She sure can go.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hell,” answered a whisky voice somewhere in the
smoke. “That nappy-headed black woman? Gimme a high
yaller for mine all de time. I can’t use no coal!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, de blacker de berry, de sweeter de juice,” protested
a slick-haired ebony youth in the center of the
place.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Ain’t that right, sport?” he demanded of Sandy,
grabbing him jokingly by the neck and picking him up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I guess it is,” said the child, scared, and the men laughed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here, kid, buy yourself a drink,” the slick-headed boy
said, slipping Sandy a nickel as he set him down gently at
the door. “And be sure it’s pop—not gin.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Outside, the youngster dried his wet hands on a handkerchief,
blinked his smoky eyes, and immediately bought the
soda, a red strawberry liquid in a long, thick bottle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly and without warning the cornet blared at
the other end of the hall in an ear-splitting wail: “Whaw!
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Whaw! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Whaw! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Whaw!” and the snare-drum
rolled in answer. A pause .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. then the loud brassy notes were
repeated and the banjo came in, “Plinka, plink, plink,” like
timid drops of rain after a terrific crash of thunder. Then
quite casually, as though nothing had happened, the piano
lazied into a slow drag, with all the other instruments following.
And with the utmost nonchalance the drummer
struck into time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ever’body shake!” cried Benbow, as a ribbon of laughter
swirled round the hall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Couples began to sway languidly, melting together like
candy in the sun as hips rotated effortlessly to the music.
Girls snuggled pomaded heads on men’s chests, or rested
powdered chins on men’s shoulders, while wild young boys
put both arms tightly around their partners’ waists and let
their hands hang down carelessly over female haunches.
Bodies moved ever so easily together—ever so easily, as
Benbow turned towards his musicians and cried through
cupped hands: “Aw, screech it, boys!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A long, tall, gangling gal stepped back from her partner,
adjusted her hips, and did a few easy, gliding steps all her
own before her man grabbed her again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Eu-o-oo-ooo-oooo!” moaned the cornet titillating with
pain, as the banjo cried in stop-time, and the piano sobbed
aloud with a rhythmical, secret passion. But the drums kept
up their hard steady laughter—like somebody who don’t
care.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I see you plowin’, Uncle Walt,” called a little autumn-leaf
brown with switching skirts to a dark-purple man grinding
down the center of the floor with a yellow woman. Two
short prancing blacks stopped in their tracks to quiver violently.
A bushy-headed girl threw out her arms, snapped her
fingers, and began to holler: “Hey! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Hey!” while her perspiring
partner held doggedly to each hip in an effort to
keep up with her. All over the hall, people danced their own
individual movements to the scream and moan of the music.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Get low .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. low down .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. down!” cried the drummer,
bouncing like a rubber ball in his chair. The banjo scolded
in diabolic glee, and the cornet panted as though it were out
of breath, and Benbow himself left the band and came out
on the floor to dance slowly and ecstatically with a large Indian-brown
woman covered with diamonds.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, do it, Mister Benbow!” one of his admirers shouted
frenziedly as the hall itself seemed to tremble.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“High yallers, draw nigh! Brown-skins, come near!”
somebody squalled. “But black gals, stay where you are!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whaw! Whaw! Whaw!” mocked the cornet—but the
steady tomtom of the drums was no longer laughter now, no
longer even pleasant: the drum-beats had become sharp
with surly sound, like heavy waves that beat angrily on a
granite rock. And under the dissolute spell of its own
rhythm the music had got quite beyond itself. The four
black men in Benbow’s wandering band were exploring
depths to which mere sound had no business to go. Cruel,
desolate, unadorned was their music now, like the body of a
ravished woman on the sun-baked earth; violent and hard,
like a giant standing over his bleeding mate in the blazing
sun. The odors of bodies, the stings of flesh, and the utter
emptiness of soul when all is done—these things the piano
and the drums, the cornet and the twanging banjo insisted
on hoarsely to a beat that made the dancers move, in that
little hall, like pawns on a frenetic checker-board.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, play it, Mister Benbow!” somebody cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The earth rolls relentlessly, and the sun blazes for ever on
the earth, breeding, breeding. But why do you insist like the
earth, music? Rolling and breeding, earth and sun for ever,
relentlessly. But why do you insist like the sun? Like the lips
of women? Like the bodies of men, relentlessly?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, play it, Mister Benbow!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But why do you insist, music?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Who understands the earth? Do you, Mingo? Who understands
the sun? Do you, Harriett? Does anybody
know—among you high yallers, you jelly-beans, you pinks
and pretty daddies, among you sealskin browns, smooth
blacks, and chocolates-to-the-bone—does anybody know
the answer?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, play it, Benbow!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s midnight. De clock is strikin’ twelve, an’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, play it, Mister Benbow!”</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>During intermission, when the members of the band
stopped making music to drink gin and talk to women, Harriett
and Mingo bought Sandy a box of cracker-jacks and
another bottle of soda and left him standing in the middle
of the floor holding both. His young aunt had forgotten
time, so Sandy decided to go upstairs to the narrow unused
balcony that ran the length of one side of the place. It was
dusty up there, but a few broken chairs stood near the railing
and he sat on one of them. He leaned his arms on the
banister, rested his chin in his hands, and when the music
started, he looked down on the mass of moving couples
crowding the floor. He had a clear view of the energetic little
black drummer eagle-rocking with staccato regularity in
his chair as his long, thin sticks descended upon the tightly
drawn skin of his small drum, while his foot patted the pedal
of his big bass-drum, on which was painted in large red letters:
“<span class='sc'>benbow’s famous kansas city band</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the slow shuffle gained in intensity (and his cracker-jacks
gave out), Sandy looked down drowsily on the men
and women, the boys and girls, circling and turning beneath
him. Dresses and suits of all shades and colors, and a
vast confusion of bushy heads on swaying bodies. Faces
gleaming like circus balloons—lemon-yellow, coal-black,
powder-grey, ebony-black, blue-black faces; chocolate,
brown, orange, tan, creamy-gold faces—the room full of
floating balloon faces—Sandy’s eyes were beginning to blur
with sleep—colored balloons with strings, and the music
pulling the strings. No! Girls pulling the strings—each boy
a balloon by a string. Each face a balloon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy put his head down on the dusty railing of the
gallery. An odor of hair-oil and fish, of women and sweat
came up to him as he sat there alone, tired and a little sick.
It was very warm and close, and the room was full of chatter
during the intervals. Sandy struggled against sleep, but his
eyes were just about to close when, with a burst of hopeless
sadness, the <span class='it'>St. Louis Blues</span> spread itself like a bitter syrup
over the hall. For a moment the boy opened his eyes to the
drowsy flow of sound, long enough to pull two chairs together;
then he lay down on them and closed his eyes again.
Somebody was singing:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>St. Louis woman with her diamond rings .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>as the band said very weary things in a loud and brassy
manner and the dancers moved in a dream that seemed to
have forgotten itself:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Got ma man tied to her apron-strings .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Wah! Wah! Wah! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The cornet laughed with terrible
rudeness. Then the drums began to giggle and the banjo
whined an insulting leer. The piano said, over and over
again: “St. Louis! That big old dirty town where the Mississippi’s
deep and wide, deep and wide .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” and the hips of the
dancers rolled.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Man’s got a heart like a rock cast in de sea .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>while the cynical banjo covered unplumbable depths with
a plinking surface of staccato gaiety, like the sparkling bubbles
that rise on deep water over a man who has just
drowned himself:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Or else he never would a gone so far from me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>then the band stopped with a long-drawn-out wail from
the cornet and a flippant little laugh from the drums.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A great burst of applause swept over the room, and the
musicians immediately began to play again. This time just
blues, not the <span class='it'>St. Louis</span>, nor the <span class='it'>Memphis</span>, nor the <span class='it'>Yellow
Dog</span>—but just the plain old familiar blues, heart-breaking
and extravagant, ma-baby’s-gone-from-me blues.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nobody thought about anyone else then. Bodies
sweatily close, arms locked, cheek to cheek, breast to
breast, couples rocked to the pulse-like beat of the rhythm,
yet quite oblivious each person of the other. It was true
that men and women were dancing together, but their feet
had gone down through the floor into the earth, each
dancer’s alone—down into the center of things—and their
minds had gone off to the heart of loneliness, where they
didn’t even hear the words, the sometimes lying, sometimes
laughing words that Benbow, leaning on the piano,
was singing against this background of utterly despondent
music:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>When de blues is got you,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Ain’t no use to run away.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>When de blue-blues got you,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Ain’t no use to run away,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>’Cause de blues is like a woman</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>That can turn yo’ good hair grey.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Umn-ump! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Umn! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Umn-ump!</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Well, I tole ma baby,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Says baby, baby, babe, be mine,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>But ma baby was deceitful.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>She must a thought that I was blind.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>De-da! De-da! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. De da! De da! Dee!</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>O, Lawdy, Lawdy, Lawdy,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Lawdy, Lawdy, Lawd .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lawd .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lawd!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>She quit me fo’ a Texas gambler,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>So I had to git another broad.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Whaw-whaw! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Whaw-whaw-whaw! As though the
laughter of a cornet could reach the heart of loneliness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>These mean old weary blues coming from a little orchestra
of four men who needed no written music because they
couldn’t have read it. Four men and a leader—Rattle Benbow
from Galveston; Benbow’s buddy, the drummer, from
Houston; his banjoist from Birmingham; his cornetist from
Atlanta; and the pianist, long-fingered, sissyfied, a coal-black
lad from New Orleans who had brought with him an
exaggerated rag-time which he called jazz.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m jazzin’ it, creepers!” he sometimes yelled as he
rolled his eyes towards the dancers and let his fingers beat
the keys to a frenzy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But now the piano was cryin’ the
blues!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Four homeless, plug-ugly niggers, that’s all they were,
playing mean old loveless blues in a hot, crowded little
dance-hall in a Kansas town on Friday night. Playing the
heart out of loneliness with a wide-mouthed leader, who
sang everybody’s troubles until they became his own. The
improvising piano, the whanging banjo, the throbbing
bass-drum, the hard-hearted little snare-drum, the brassy
comet that laughed, “Whaw-whaw-whaw.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Whaw!”
were the waves in this lonesome sea of harmony from which
Benbow’s melancholy voice rose:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>You gonna wake up some mawnin’</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ turn yo’ smilin’ face.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Wake up some early mawnin’,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Says turn yo’ smilin’ face,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Look at yo’ sweetie’s pillow—</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ find an’ empty place!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Then the music whipped itself into a slow fury, an awkward,
elemental, foot-stamping fury, with the banjo running
terrifiedly away in a windy moan and then coming
back again, with the cornet wailing like a woman who don’t
know what it’s all about:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Then you gonna call yo’ baby,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Call yo’ lovin’ baby dear—</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>But you can keep on callin’,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>’Cause I won’t be here!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>And for a moment nothing was heard save the shuf-shuf-shuffle
of feet and the immense booming of the bass-drum
like a living vein pulsing at the heart of loneliness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sandy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. My stars! Where is that child?
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Has anybody seen my little nephew?” All over the
hall.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Sandy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Oh-o-o, Lord!” Finally, with a sigh of
relief: “You little brat, darn you, hiding up here in the balcony
where nobody could find you! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy, wake up! It’s
past four o’clock and I’ll get killed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett vigorously shook the sleeping child, who lay
stretched on the dusty chairs; then she began to drag him
down the narrow steps before he was scarcely awake. The
hall was almost empty and the chubby little black drummer
was waddling across the floor carrying his drums in canvas
cases. Someone was switching off the lights one by one. A
mustard-colored man stood near the door quarrelling with
a black woman. She began to cry and he slapped her full in
the mouth, then turned his back and left with another girl
of maple-sugar brown. Harriett jerked Sandy past this
linked couple and pulled the boy down the long flight of
stairs into the street, where Mingo stood waiting, with a
lighted cigarette making a white line against his black skin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You better git a move on,” he said. “Daylight ain’t
holdin’ itself back for you!” And he told the truth, for the
night had already begun to pale.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy felt sick at the stomach. To be awakened precipitately
made him cross and ill-humored, but the fresh, cool
air soon caused him to feel less sleepy and not quite so ill.
He took a deep breath as he trotted rapidly along on the
sidewalk beside his striding aunt and her boy friend. He
watched the blue-grey dawn blot out the night in the sky;
and then pearl-grey blot out the blue, while the stars faded
to points of dying fire. And he listened to the birds chirping
and trilling in the trees as though they were calling the sun.
Then, as he became fully awake, the child began to feel very
proud of himself, for this was the first time he had ever been
away from home all night.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett was fussing with Mingo. “You shouldn’t’ve kept
me out like that,” she said. “Why didn’t you tell me what
time it was? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I didn’t know.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And Mingo came back: “Hey, didn’t I try to drag you
away at midnight and you wouldn’t come? And ain’t I called
you at one o’clock and you said: ‘Wait a minute’—dancin’
with some yaller P. I. from St. Joe, with your arms round his
neck like a life-preserver? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Don’t tell me I didn’t want to
leave, and me got to go to work at eight o’clock this mornin’
with a pick and shovel when the whistle blows! What de
hell?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Harriett did not care to quarrel now when there
would be no time to finish it properly. She was out of breath
from hurrying and almost in tears. She was afraid to go
home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mingo, I’m scared.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, you know what you can do if your ma puts you
out,” her escort said quickly, forgetting his anger. “I can
take care of you. We could get married.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Could we, Mingo?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She slipped her hand in his. “Aw, daddy!” and the pace
became much less hurried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they reached the corner near which Harriett lived,
she lifted her dark little purple-powdered face for a not very
lingering kiss and sent Mingo on his way. Then she frowned
anxiously and ran on. The sky was a pale pearly color, waiting
for the warm gold of the rising sun.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m scared to death!” said Harriett. “Lord, Sandy, I hope
ma ain’t up! I hope she didn’t come home last night from
Mis’ Lane’s. We shouldn’t’ve gone, Sandy .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I guess we
shouldn’t’ve gone.” She was breathing hard and Sandy had
to run fast to keep up with her. “Gee, I’m scared!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The grass was diamond-like with dew, and the red bricks
of the sidewalk were damp, as the small boy and his young
aunt hurried under the leafy elms along the walk. They
passed Madam de Carter’s house and cut through the wet
grass into their own yard as the first rays of the morning sun
sifted through the trees. Quietly they tip-toed towards the
porch; quickly and quietly they crossed it; and softly, ever so
softly, they opened the parlor door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the early dusk the oil-lamp still burned on the front-room
table, and in an old arm-chair, with the open Bible on
her lap, sat Aunt Hager Williams, a bundle of switches on
the floor at her feet.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap09'>CHAPTER IX</h1></div>

<h3>Carnival</h3>

<p class='pindent'>Between the tent of Christ and the tents of sin there
stretched scarcely a half-mile. Rivalry reigned: the revival
and the carnival held sway in Stanton at the same time.
Both were at the south edge of town, and both were loud
and musical in their activities. In a dirty-white tent in the
Hickory Woods the Reverend Duke Braswell conducted
the services of the Lord for the annual summer tent-meeting
of the First Ethiopian Baptist Church. And in Jed Gateway’s
meadow lots Swank’s Combined Shows, the World’s
Greatest Midway Carnival, had spread canvas for seven
days of bunko games and cheap attractions. The old Negroes
went to the revival, and the young Negroes went to
the carnival, and after sundown these August evenings the
mourning songs of the Christians could be heard rising
from the Hickory Woods while the profound syncopation
of the minstrel band blared from Gateway’s Lots, strangely
intermingling their notes of praise and joy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager with Annjee and Sandy went to the revival
every night (Sandy unwillingly), while Jimboy, Harriett, and
Maudel went to the carnival. Aunt Hager prayed for her
youngest daughter at the meetings, but Harriett had not
spoken to her mother, if she could avoid it, since the morning
after the dance, when she had been whipped. Since their
return from the country Annjee and Jimboy were not so
loving towards each other, either, as they had been before.
Jimboy tired of Jessie’s farm, so he came back to town three
days before his wife returned. And now the revival and the
carnival widened the breach between the Christians and the
sinners in Aunt Hager’s little household. And Sandy would
rather have been with the sinners—Jimboy and Harriett—but
he wasn’t old enough; so he had to go to meetings until,
on Thursday morning, when he and Buster were climbing
over the coal-shed in the back yard, Sandy accidentally
jumped down on a rusty nail, which penetrated the heel of
his bare foot. He set up a wail, cried until noon over the
pain, and refused to eat any dinner; so finally Jimboy said
that if he would only hush hollering he’d take him to the
carnival that evening.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, take de rascal,” said Aunt Hager. “He ain’t doin’ no
good at de services, wiggling and squirming so’s we can’t
hardly hear de sermon. He ain’t got religion in his heart,
that chile!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope he ain’t,” said his father, yawning.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All you wants him to be is a good-fo’-nothin’ rounder
like you is,” retorted Hager. And she and Jimboy began their
daily quarrel, which lasted for hours, each of them enjoying
it immensely. But Sandy kept pulling at his father and saying:
“Hurry up and let’s go,” although he knew well that
nothing really started at the carnival until sundown. Nevertheless,
about four o’clock, Jimboy said: “All right, come
on,” and they started out in the hot sun towards Galoway’s
Lots, the man walking tall and easy while the boy hobbled
along on his sore foot, a rag tied about his heel.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>At the old cross-bar gate on the edge of town, through
which Jed Galoway drove his cows to pasture, there had
been erected a portable arch strung with electric lights
spelling out “<span class='sc'>Swank’s Shows</span>” in red and yellow letters,
but it was not very impressive in the day-time, with the sun
blazing on it, and no people about. And from this gate, extending
the whole length of the meadow on either side,
like a roadway, were the tents and booths of the carnival:
the Galatea illusion, the seal and sea-lion circus, the
Broadway musical-comedy show, the freaks, the games of
chance, the pop-corn- and lemonade-stands, the colored
minstrels, the merry-go-round, the fun house, the
hoochie-coochie, the Ferris wheel, and, at the far end, a
canvas tank under a tiny platform high in the air from
which the World’s Most Dangerous and Spectacular High
Dive took place nightly at ten-thirty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We gonna stay to see that, ain’t we, papa?” Sandy asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure,” said Jimboy. “But didn’t I tell you there wouldn’t
be nothin’ runnin’ this early in the afternoon? See! Not
even the band playin’, and ain’t a thing open but the freak-show
and I’ll bet all the freaks asleep.” But he bought Sandy
a bag of peanuts and planked down twenty cents for two
tickets into the sultry tent where a perspiring fat woman
and a tame-looking wild-man were the only attractions to
be found on the platforms. The sword-swallower was not
yet at work, nor the electric marvel, nor the human glass-eater.
The terrific sun beat fiercely through the canvas on
this exhibit of two lone human abnormalities, and the few
spectators in the tent kept wiping their faces with their
handkerchiefs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy struck up a conversation with the Fat Woman, a
pink and white creature who said she lived in Columbus,
Ohio; and when Jimboy said he’d been there, she was interested.
She said she had always lived right next door to colored
people at home, and she gave Sandy a postcard picture
of herself for nothing, although it had “10¢” marked on the
back. She kept saying she didn’t see how anybody could stay
in Kansas and it a dry state where a soul couldn’t even get
beer except from a bootlegger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Sandy and his father came out, they left the row of
tents and went across the meadow to a clump of big shade-trees
beneath which several colored men who worked with
the show were sitting. A blanket had been spread on the
grass, and a crap game was going on to the accompaniment
of much arguing and good-natured cussing. But most of the
men were just sitting around not playing, and one or two
were stretched flat on their faces, asleep. Jimboy seemed to
know several of the fellows, so he joined in their talk while
Sandy watched the dice roll for a while, but since the boy
didn’t understand the game, he decided to go back to the
tents.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, go ahead,” said his father. “I’ll pick you up later
when the lights are lit and things get started; then we can go
in the shows.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy limped off, walking on the toe of his injured foot.
In front of the sea-lion circus he found Earl James, a little
white boy in his grade at school; the two of them went
around together for a while, looking at the large painted
canvas pictures in front of the shows or else lying on their
stomachs on the ground to peep under the tents. When
they reached the minstrel-show tent near the end of the
midway, they heard a piano tinkling within and the sound of
hands clapping as though someone was dancing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jeezus! Let’s see this,” Earl cried, so the two boys got
down on their bellies, wriggled under the flap of the tent on
one side, and looked in.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A battered upright piano stood on the ground in front of
the stage, and a fat, bald-headed Negro was beating out a
rag. A big white man in a checkered vest was leaning against
the piano, derby on head, and a long cigar stuck in his
mouth. He was watching a slim black girl, with skirts held
high and head thrown back, prancing in a mad circle of
crazy steps. Two big colored boys in red uniforms were patting
time, while another girl sat on a box, her back towards
the peeping youngsters staring up from under the edge of
the tent. As the girl who was dancing whirled about, Sandy
saw that it was Harriett.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Pretty good, ain’t she, boss?” yelled the wrinkle-necked
Negro at the piano as he pounded away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The white man nodded and kept his eyes on Harriett’s
legs. The two black boys patting time were grinning from
ear to ear.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do it, Miss Mama!” one of them shouted as Harriett began
to sashay gracefully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Finally she stopped, panting and perspiring, with her lips
smiling and her eyes sparkling gaily. Then she went with
the white man and the colored piano-player behind the
canvas curtains to the stage. One of the show-boys put his
arms around the girl sitting on the box and began tentatively
to feel her breasts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t be so fresh, hot papa,” she said. And Sandy recognized
Mandel’s voice, and saw her brown face as she leaned
back to look at the show-man. The boy in the red suit bent
over and kissed her several times, while the other fellow
kept imitating the steps he had just seen Harriett performing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s go,” Earl said to Sandy, rolling over on the ground.
The two small boys went on to the next tent, where one of
the carnival men caught them, kicked their behinds
soundly, and sent them away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sun was setting in a pink haze, and the show-grounds
began to take on an air of activity. The steam calliope
gave a few trial hoots, and the merry-go-round circled
slowly without passengers, the paddle-wheels and the get-’em-hot
men, the lemonade-sellers and the souvenir-vendors
were opening their booths to the evening trade. A
barker began to ballyhoo in front of the freak-show. By and
by there would be a crowd. The lights came on along the
Midway, the Ferris wheel swept languidly up into the air,
and when Sandy found his father, the colored band had begun
to play in front of the minstrel show.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want to ride on the merry-go-round,” Sandy insisted.
“And go in the Crazy House.” So they did both; then they
bought hamburger sandwiches with thick slices of white
onion and drank strawberry soda and ate pop-corn with
butter on it. They went to the sea-lion circus, tried to win a
Kewpie doll at the paddle-wheel booth, and watched men
losing money on the hidden pea, then trying to win it back
at four-card monte behind the Galatea attraction. And all
the while Sandy said nothing to his father about having seen
Harriett dancing in the minstrel tent that afternoon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy had lived too long with three women not to have
learned to hold his tongue about the private doings of each
of them. When Annjee paid two dollars a week on a blue silk
shirt for his father at Cohn’s cut-rate credit store, and Sandy
saw her make the payments, he knew without being told
that the matter was never to be mentioned to Aunt Hager.
And if his grandmother sometimes threw Harriett’s rouge
out in the alley, Sandy saw it with his eyes, but not with his
mouth. Because he loved all three of them—Harriett and
Annjee and Hager—he didn’t carry tales on any one of
them to the others. Nobody would know he had watched
his Aunt Harrie dancing on the carnival lot today in front of
a big fat white man in a checkered vest while a Negro in a
red suit played the piano.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We got a half-dollar left for the minstrel show,” said
Jimboy. “Come on, let’s go.” And he pulled his son through
the crowd that jammed the long Midway between the
booths.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the bright lights of the carnival were on now, and
everything was running full blast. The merry-go-round
whirled to the ear-splitting hoots of the calliope; bands
blared; the canvas paintings of snakes and dancing-girls,
human skeletons, fire-eaters, billowed in the evening
breeze; pennants flapped, barkers shouted, acrobats twirled
in front of a tent; a huge paddle-wheel clicked out numbers.
Folks pushed and shoved and women called to their children
not to get lost. In the air one smelled the scent of
trampled grass, peanuts, and hot dogs, animals and human
bodies.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The large white man in the checkered vest was making
the ballyhoo in front of the minstrel show, his expansive
belly turned towards the crowd that had been attracted by
the band. One hand pointed towards a tawdry group of
hard-looking Negro performers standing on the platform.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here we have, ladies and gents, Madam Caledonia Watson,
the Dixie song-bird; Dancing Jenkins, the dark strutter
from Jacksonville; little Lizzie Roach, champeen coon-shouter
of Georgia; and last, but not least, Sambo and Rastus,
the world’s funniest comedians. Last performance this
evening! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Strike her up, perfesser! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Come along, now,
folks!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The band burst into sound, Madam Watson and Lizzie
Roach opened their brass-lined throats, the men dropped
into a momentary clog-dance, and then the whole crowd of
performers disappeared into the tent. The ticket-purchasing
townspeople followed through the public opening beneath
a gaudily painted sign picturing a Mississippi
steamboat in the moonlight, and two black bucks shooting
gigantic dice on a street-corner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy and Sandy followed the band inside and took
seats, and soon the frayed curtain rose, showing a plantation
scene in the South, where three men, blackened up,
and two women in bandannas sang longingly about Dixie.
Then Sambo and Rastus came out with long wooden razors
and began to argue and shoot dice, but presently the lights
went out and a ghost appeared and frightened the two men
away, causing them to leave all the money on the stage.
(The audience thought it screamingly funny—and just like
niggers.) After that one of the women sang a rag-time song
and did the eagle-rock. Then a man with a banjo in his
hands began to play, but until then the show had been lifeless.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Listen to him,” Jimboy said, punching Sandy. “He’s
good!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The piece he was picking was full of intricate runs and
trills long drawn out, then suddenly slipping into tantalizing
rhythms. It ended with a vibrant whang!—and the audience
yelled for more. As an encore he played a blues and
sang innumerable verses, always ending:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ Ah can’t be satisfied,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>’Cause all Ah love has</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Done laid down an’ died.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>And to Sandy it seemed like the saddest music in the
world—but the white people around him laughed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then the stage lights went on, the band blared, and all
the black actors came trooping back, clapping their hands
before the cotton-field curtain as each one in turn danced
like fury, vigorously distorting agile limbs into the most
amazing positions, while the scene ended with the fattest
mammy and the oldest uncle shaking jazzily together.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>The booths were all putting out their lights as the people
poured through the gate towards town. Sandy hobbled
down the road beside his father, his sore heel, which had
been forgotten all evening, paining him terribly until Jimboy
picked him up and carried him on his shoulder. Automobiles
and buggies whirled past them in clouds of gritty
dust, and young boys calling vulgar words hurried after tittering
girls. When Sandy and his father reached home,
Aunt Hager and Annjee had not yet returned from the revival.
Jimboy said he thought maybe they had stopped at
Mrs. Lane’s to sit up all night with the sick woman, so Sandy
spread his pallet on the floor at the foot of his grandmother’s
bed and went to sleep. He did not hear his Aunt
Harriett when she came home, but late in the night he woke
up with his heel throbbing painfully, his throat dry, and his
skin burning, and when he tried to bend his leg, it hurt him
so that he began to cry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett, awakened by his moans, called drowsily:
“What’s the matter, honey?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My foot,” said Sandy tearfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So his young aunt got out of bed, lit the lamp, and helped
him to the kitchen, where she heated a kettle of water,
bathed his heel, and covered the nail-wound with vaseline.
Then she bound it with a fresh white rag.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now that ought to feel better,” she said as she led him
back to his pallet, and soon they were both asleep again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The next morning when Hager came from the sick-bed
of her friend, she sent to the butcher-shop for a bacon rind,
cut from it a piece of fat meat, and bound it to Sandy’s heel
as a cure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t want you havin’ de blood-pisen here,” she said.
“An’ don’t you run round an’ play on that heel. Set out on de
porch an’ study yo’ reader, ’cause school’ll be startin’ next
month.” Then she began Mrs. Reinhart’s ironing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The next day, Saturday, the last day of the carnival, Jimboy
carried the Reinharts’ clothes home for Hager, since
Sandy was crippled and Jimmy Lane’s mother was down in
bed. But after delivering the clothes Jimboy did not come
home for supper. When Annjee and Hager wanted to leave
for the revival in the early evening, they asked Harriett if
she would stay home with the little boy, for Sandy’s heel had
swollen purple where the rusty nail had penetrated and he
could hardly walk at all.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You been gone ever’ night this week,” Hager said to the
girl. “An’ you ain’t been anear de holy tents where de Lawd’s
word is preached; so you ought to be willin’ to stay home
one night with a po’ little sick boy.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m,” Harriett muttered in a noncommittal tone. But
shortly after her mother and Annjee had gone, she said to
her nephew: “You aren’t afraid to stay home by yourself, are
you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And Sandy answered: “Course not, Aunt Harrie.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She gave him a hot bath and put a new piece of fat meat on
his festering heel. Then she told him to climb into Annjee’s
bed and go to sleep, but instead he lay for a long time looking
out the window that was beside the bed. He thought
about the carnival—the Ferris wheel sweeping up into the
air, and the minstrel show. Then he remembered Benbow’s
dance a few weeks ago and how his Aunt Harriett had stood
sullenly the next morning while Hager whipped her—and
hadn’t cried at all, until the welts came under her silk stockings.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Then he wondered what Jimmy Lane would do if
his sick mother died from the T. B. and he were left with nobody
to take care of him, because Jimmy’s stepfather was no
good.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Eu-uuu! His heel hurt! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. When school began
again, he would be in the fifth grade, but he wished he’d
hurry up and get to high school, like Harriett was.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. When
he got to be a man, he was going to be a railroad engineer.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Gee, he wasn’t sleepy—and his heel throbbed painfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the next room Harriett had lighted the oil-lamp and
was moving swiftly about taking clothes from the dresser-drawers
and spreading them on the bed. She thought Sandy
was asleep, he knew—but he couldn’t go to sleep the way his
foot hurt him. He could see her through the doorway folding
her dresses in little piles and he wondered why she was
doing that. Then she took an old suit-case from the closet
and began to pack it, and when it was full, she pulled a new
bag from under the bed, and into it she dumped her toilet-articles,
powder, vaseline, nail-polish, straightening comb,
and several pairs of old stockings rolled in balls. Then she
sat down on the bed between the two closed suit-cases for a
long time with her hands in her lap and her eyes staring
ahead of her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Finally she rose and closed the bureau-drawers, tidied up
the confusion she had created, and gathered together the
discarded things she had thrown on the floor. Then Sandy
heard her go out into the back yard towards the trash-pile.
When she returned, she put on a tight little hat and went
into the kitchen to wash her hands, throwing the water
through the back door. Then she tip-toed into the room
where Sandy was lying and kissed him gently on the head.
Sandy knew that she thought he was asleep, but in spite of
himself he suddenly threw his arms tightly around her
neck. He couldn’t help it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where you going, Aunt Harriett?” he said, sitting up in
bed, clutching the girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Honey, you won’t tell on me, will you?” Harriett asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” he answered, and she knew he wouldn’t. “But
where are you going, Aunt Harrie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You won’t be afraid to stay here until grandma comes?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” burying his face on her breast. “I won’t be afraid.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And you won’t forget Aunt Harrie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Course not.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m leaving with the carnival,” she told him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a moment they sat close together on the bed. Then
she kissed him, went into the other room and picked up her
suit-cases—and the door closed.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap10'>CHAPTER X</h1></div>

<h3>Punishment</h3>

<p class='pindent'>Old white Dr. McDillors, beloved of all the Negroes in
Stanton, came on Sunday morning, swabbed Sandy’s festering
foot with iodine, bound it up, and gave him a bottle of
green medicine to take, and by the middle of the week the
boy was able to hobble about again without pain; but Hager
continued to apply fat meat instead of following the doctor’s
directions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Harriett didn’t come back, Sandy no longer slept
on a pallet on the floor. He slept in the big bed with his
grandma Hager, and the evenings that followed weren’t so
jolly, with his young aunt off with the carnival, and Jimboy
spending most of his time at the pool hall or else loafing on
the station platform watching the trains come through—and
nobody playing music in the back yard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They went to bed early these days, and after that eventful
week of carnival and revival, a sore heel, and a missing Aunt
Harriett, the muscles of Sandy’s little body often twitched
and jerked in his sleep and he would awaken suddenly from
dreaming that he heard sad raggy music playing while a
woman shouted for Jesus in the Gospel tent, and a girl in
red silk stockings cried because the switches were cutting
her legs. Sometimes he would lie staring into the darkness a
long time, while Aunt Hager lay snoring at his side. And
sometimes in the next room, where Annjee and Jimboy
were, he could hear the slow rhythmical creaking of the
bed-springs and the low moans of his mother, which he already
knew accompanied the grown-up embraces of bodily
love. And sometimes through the window he could see the
moonlight glinting on the tall, tassel-crowned stalks of corn
in the garden. Perhaps he would toss and turn until he had
awakened Aunt Hager and she would say drowsily: “What’s
de matter with you, chile? I’ll put you back on de flo’ if you
can’t be still!” Then he would go to sleep again, and before
he knew it, the sun would be flooding the room with warm
light, and the coffee would be boiling on the stove in the
kitchen, and Annjee would have gone to work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Summer days were long and drowsy for grown-ups, but
for Sandy they were full of interest. In the mornings he
helped Aunt Hager by feeding the chickens, bringing in the
water for her wash-tubs, and filling the buckets from which
they drank. He chopped wood, too, and piled it behind the
kitchen-stove; then he would take the broom and sweep
dust-clean the space around the pump and under the apple-tree
where he played. Perhaps by that time Willie-Mae
would come over or Buster would be there to shoot marbles.
Or maybe his grandmother would send him to the
store to get a pound of sugar or ten cents’ worth of meal for
dinner, and on the way there was certain to be an adventure.
Yesterday he had seen two bad little boys from the Bottoms,
collecting scrap-iron and junk in the alleys, get angry at
each other and pretend to start a fight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The big one said to the smaller one: “I’m a fast-black and
you know I sho won’t run! Jest you pick up that piece o’ iron
that belongs to me. Go ahead, jest you try!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And the short boy replied: “I’m your match, long skinny!
Strike me an’ see if you don’t get burnt up!” And then they
started to play the dozens, and Sandy, standing by, learned
several new and very vulgar words to use when talking
about other people’s mothers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tall kid said finally: “Aw, go on, you little clay-colored
nigger, you looks too much like mustard to me anyhow!”
Picking up the disputed piece of scrap-iron, he
proceeded on his quest for junk, looking into all the trash-piles
and garbage-cans along the alley, but the smaller of
the two boys took his gunny-sack and went in the opposite
direction alone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Be careful, sissy, and don’t break your dishes,” his late
companion called after his retreating buddy, and Sandy
carefully memorized the expression to try on Jimmy Lane
some time—that is, if Jimmy’s mother got well, for Mrs.
Lane now was in the last stages of consumption. But if she
got better, Sandy was going to tell her son to be careful and
not break his dishes—always wearing his mother’s shoes,
like a girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By that time he had forgotten what Hager sent him to the
store to buy, and instead of getting meal he bought washing-powder.
When he came home, after nearly an hour’s absence,
his grandmother threatened to cut an elm switch, but
she satisfied herself instead by scolding him for staying so
long, and then sending him back to exchange the washing-powder
for meal—and she waiting all that time to make
corn dumplings to put in the greens!</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the afternoon Sandy played in his back yard or next
door at the Johnsons’, but Hager never allowed him outside
their block. The white children across the street were frequently
inclined to say “Nigger,” so he was forbidden to
play there. Usually Buster, who looked like a white kid, and
Willie-Mae, who couldn’t have been blacker, were his companions.
The three children would run at hide-and-seek, in
the tall corn; or they would tag one another in the big yard,
or play house under the apple-tree.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once when they were rummaging in the trash-pile to see
what they could find, Sandy came across a pawn ticket
which he took into the kitchen to Hager. It was for a watch
his Aunt Harriett had pawned the Saturday she ran away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sometimes in the late afternoon the children would go
next door to Madam de Carter’s and she would give them
ginger cookies and read to them from the <span class='it'>Bible Story Reader</span>.
Madam de Carter looked very pompous and important in
her silk waist as she would put on her <span class='it'>pince-nez</span> and say:
“Now, children, seat yourselves and preserve silence while I
read you-all this moralizing history of Samson’s treacherous
hair. Now, Buster, who were Samson? Willie-Mae, has
you ever heard of Delilah?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sometimes, if Jimboy was home, he would take down his
old guitar and start the children to dancing in the sunlight—but
then Hager would always call Sandy to pump water
or go to the store as soon as she heard the music.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Out there dancin’ like you ain’t got no raisin’!” she
would say. “I tells Jimboy ’bout playin’ that ole rag-time
here! That’s what ruint Harriett!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And on Sundays Sandy went to Sabbath school at the
Shiloh Baptist Church, where he was given a colored picture
card with a printed text on it. The long, dull lessons were
taught by Sister Flora Garden, who had been to Wilberforce
College, in Ohio. There were ten little boys in Sandy’s class,
ranging from nine to fourteen, and they behaved very badly,
for Miss Flora Garden, who wore thick-lensed glasses on
her roach-colored face, didn’t understand little boys.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where was Moses when the lights went out?” Gritty
Smith asked her every Sunday, and she didn’t even know the
answer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy didn’t think much of Sunday School, and frequently
instead of putting his nickel in the collection basket he spent
it for candy, which he divided with Buster—until one very
hot Sunday Hager found it out. He had put a piece of the
sticky candy in his shirt-pocket and it melted, stuck, and
stained the whole front of his clean clothes. When he came
home, with Buster behind him, the first thing Hager said
was: “What’s all this here stuck up in yo’ pocket?” and Buster
commenced to giggle and said Sandy had bought candy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where’d you get the money, sir?” demanded Aunt
Hager searchingly of her grandson.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I—we—er—Madam Carter gimme a nickel,” Sandy
replied haltingly, choosing the first name he could think of,
which would have been all right had not Madam de Carter
herself stopped by the house, almost immediately afterwards,
on her way home from church.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is you give Sandy a nickel to buy candy this mawnin’?”
Hager asked her as soon as she entered the parlor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, no, Sister Williams, I isn’t. I had no coins about
me a-tall at services this morning.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Umn-huh! I thought so!” said Hager. “You, Sandy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little boy, guilt written all over his face, came in from
the front porch, where he had been sitting with his father
after Buster went home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where’d you tell me you got that nickel this mawnin’?”
And before he could answer, she spat out: “I’m gonna whip
you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jehovah help us! Children sure is bad these days,” said
Madam de Carter, shaking her head as she left to go next
door to her own house. “They sure <span class='it'>are</span> bad,” she added, self-consciously
correcting her English.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m gonna whip you,” Hager continued, sitting down,
amazed, in her plush chair. “De idee o’ withholdin’ yo’ Sunday
School money from de Lawd an’ buyin’ candy.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I only spent a penny,” Sandy lied, wriggling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How you gwine get so much candy fo’ a penny that you
has some left to gum up in yo’ pocket? Tell me that, how
you gonna do it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy, at a loss for an answer, was standing with lowered
eyelids, when the screen-door opened and Jimboy came in.
Sandy looked up at him for aid, but his father’s usually amiable
face was stern this time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come here!” he said. The man towered very tall above
the little fellow who looked up at him helplessly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’s gwine whip him!” interposed Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is that right, you spent your Sunday School nickel for
candy?” Jimboy demanded gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy nodded his head. He couldn’t lie to his father, and
had he spoken now, the sobs would have come.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Then you told a lie to your grandma—and I’m ashamed
of you,” his father said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy wanted to turn his head away and escape the slow
gaze of Jimboy’s eyes, but he couldn’t. If Aunt Hager would
only whip him, it would be better; then maybe his father
wouldn’t say any more. But it was awful to stand still and listen
to Jimboy talk to him this way—yet there he stood,
stiffly holding back the sobs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To take money and use it for what it ain’t s’posed to be
used is the same as stealing,” Jimboy went on gravely to his
son. “That’s what you done today, and then come home and
lie about it. Nobody’s ugly as a liar, you know that! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m
not much, maybe. Don’t mean to say I am. I won’t work a
lot, but what I do I do honest. White folks gets rich lyin’ and
stealin’—and some niggers gets rich that way, too—but I
don’t need money if I got to get it dishonest, with a lot o’
lies trailing behind me, and can’t look folks in the face. It
makes you feel dirty! It’s no good! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Don’t I give you nickels
for candy whenever you want ’em?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The boy nodded silently, with the tears trickling down
his chin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And don’t I go with you to the store and buy you ice-cream
and soda-pop any time you ask me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child nodded again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And then you go and take the Sunday School nickel that
your grandma’s worked hard for all the week, spend it on
candy, and come back home and lie about it. So that’s what
you do! And then lie!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy turned his back and went out on the porch, slamming
the screen-door behind him. Aunt Hager did not whip
her grandson, but returned to the kitchen and left him
standing disgraced in the parlor. Then Sandy began to cry,
with one hand in his mouth so no one could hear him, and
when Annjee came home from work in the late afternoon,
she found him lying across her bed, head under the pillows,
still sobbing because Jimboy had called him a liar.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap11'>CHAPTER XI</h1></div>

<h3>School</h3>

<p class='pindent'>Some weeks later the neighbors were treated to an early
morning concert:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I got a high yaller</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ a little short black,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>But a brown-skin gal</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Can bring me right on back!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I’m singin’ brown-skin!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Lawdy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lawd!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Brown-skin! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O, ma Lawd!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“It must be Jimboy,” said Hager from the kitchen. “A lazy
coon, settin’ out there in the cool, singin’, an’ me in here
sweatin’ and washin’ maself to dust!”</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Kansas City Southern!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I mean de W. &amp; A.!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I’m gonna ride de first train</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I catch goin’ out ma way.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I’m got de railroad blues—</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“I wish to God you’d go on, then!” mumbled Hager over
the wash-boilers.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>But I ain’t got no railroad fare!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I’m gwine to pack ma grip an’</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Beat ma way away from here!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“Learn me how to pick a chord, papa,” Sandy begged as
he sat beside his father under the apple-tree, loaded with
ripe fruit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, look a-here! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You put your thumb like
this.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” Jimboy began to explain. “But, dog-gone, your fingers
ain’t long enough yet!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Still they managed to spend a half-day twanging at the
old instrument, with Sandy trying to learn a simple tune.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>The sunny August mornings had become September
mornings, and most of Aunt Hager’s “white folks” had returned
from their vacations; her kitchen was once more a
daily laundry. Great boilers of clothes steamed on the stove
and, beside the clothes, pans of apple juice boiled to jelly,
and the peelings of peaches simmered to jam.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no news from the runaway Harriett.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mrs.
Lane died one sultry night, with Hager at the bedside, and
was buried by the lodge with three hacks and a fifty-dollar
coffin.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The following week the Drill of All Nations,
after much practising by the women, was given with great
success and Annjee, dressed in white and wrapped in a
Scandinavian flag, marched proudly as Sweden.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Madam
de Carter’s house was now locked and barred, as she had
departed for Oklahoma to organize branches of the lodge
there.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Tempy had stopped to see Hager one afternoon,
but she didn’t stay long. She told her mother she was out
collecting rents and that she and her husband were buying
another house.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Willie-Mae had a new calico dress.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Buster had learned to swear better than Sandy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And
next Monday was to be the opening of the new school
term.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy hated even to think about going back to school. He
was having much fun playing, and Jimboy had been teaching
him to box. Then the time to go to classes came.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wash yo’ face good, sir, put on yo’ clean waist, an’ polish
yo’ shoes,” Aunt Hager said, bright and early, “ ’cause I
don’t want none o’ them white teachers sayin’ I sends you to
school dirty as a ’cuse to put you back in de fourth grade.
You hear me, sir!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m,” Sandy replied.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This morning he was to enter the “white” fifth grade,
having passed last June from the “colored” fourth, for in
Stanton the Negro children were kept in separate rooms
under colored teachers until they had passed the fourth
grade. Then, from the fifth grade on, they went with the
other children, and the teachers were white.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Sandy arrived on the school grounds with his face
shining, he found the yard already full of shouting kids. On
the girls’ side he saw Willie-Mae jumping rope. Sandy
found Earl and Buster and some boys whom he knew playing
mumble-peg on the boys’ side, and he joined them.
When the bell rang, they all crowded into the building, as
the marching-lines had not yet been formed. Miss Abigail
Minter, the principal, stood at the entrance, and there were
big signs on all the room doors marking the classes. Sandy
found the fifth-grade room upstairs and went in shyly. It
was full of whispering youngsters huddled in little groups.
He saw two colored children among them, both girls whom
he didn’t know, but there were no colored boys. Soon the
teacher rapped briskly on her desk, and silence ensued.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Take seats, all of you, please,” she rasped out. “Anywhere
now until we get order.” She rapped again impatiently with
the ruler. “Take seats at once.” So the children each selected
a desk and sat down, most of the girls at the front of the
room and most of the boys together at the back, where they
could play and look out the windows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then the teacher, middle-aged and wearing glasses,
passed out tiny slips of paper to each child in the front row,
with the command that they be handed backwards, so that
every student received one slip.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now, write your names on the paper, turning it longways,”
she said. “Nothing but your names, that’s all I want
today. You will receive forms to fill out later, but I want to
get your seats assigned this morning, however.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Amid much confusion and borrowing of pencils, the slips
were finally signed in big awkward letters, and collected by
the teacher, who passed up and down the aisles. Then she
went to her desk, and there was a delightful period of whispering
and wriggling as she sorted the slips and placed
them in alphabetical order. Finally she finished.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now,” she said, “each child rise as I call out your names,
so I can see who you are.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The teacher stood up with the papers in her hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mary Atkins .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Carl Dietrich .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Josephine Evans,”
she called slowly glancing up after each name. “Franklin
Rhodes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. James Rodgers.” Sandy stood up quickly. “Ethel
Shortlidge .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Roland Thomas.” The roll-call continued,
each child standing until he had been identified, then sitting
down again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now,” the teacher said, “everybody rise and make a line
around the walls. Quietly! No talking! As I call your names
this time, take seats in order, starting with number one in
the first row near the window.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mary Atkins .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Carl
Dietrich.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” The roll was repeated, each child taking a
seat as she had commanded. When all but four of the children
were seated, the two colored girls and Sandy still were
standing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Albert Zwick,” she said, and the last white child sat down
in his place. “Now,” said the teacher, “you three colored
children take the seats behind Albert. You girls take the first
two, and you,” pointing to Sandy, “take the last
one.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Now I’m going to put on the board the list of
books to buy and I want all of you to copy them correctly.”
And she went on with her details of schoolroom routine.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One of the colored girls turned round to Sandy and whispered:
“She just put us in the back cause we’re niggers.” And
Sandy nodded gravely. “My name’s Sadie Butler and she’s
put me behind the Z cause I’m a nigger.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An old heifer!” said the first little colored girl, whispering
loudly. “I’m gonna tell my mama.” But Sandy felt like
crying. And he was beginning to be ashamed of crying because
he was no longer a small boy. But the teacher’s putting
the colored children in the back of the room made him feel
like crying.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At lunch-time he came home with his list of books, and
Aunt Hager pulled her wet arms out of the tub, wiped her
hands, and held them up in horror.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawdy! Just look! Something else to spend money for.
Ever’ year more an’ more books, an’ chillens learn less an’
less! Used to didn’t have nothin’ but a blue-backed speller,
and now look a-here—a list as long as ma arm! Go out there
in de yard an’ see is yo’ pappy got any money to give you for
’em, ’cause I ain’t.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy found Jimboy sitting dejectedly on the well-stoop
in the sunshine, with his head in his hands. “You got any
money, papa?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy looked at the list of books written in Sandy’s
childish scrawl and slowly handed him a dollar and a half.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You see what I got left, don’t you?” said his father as he
turned his pants-pockets inside out, showing the little boy a
jack-knife, a half-empty sack of Bull Durham, a key, and a
dime. But he smiled, and took Sandy awkwardly in his arms
and kissed him. “It’s all right, kid.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>That afternoon at school they had a long drill on the
multiplication table, and then they had a spelling-match,
because the teacher said that would be a good way to find
out what the children knew. For the spelling-bee they were
divided into two sides—the boys and the girls, each side lining
up against an opposite wall. Then the teacher gave out
words that they should have learned in the lower grades. On
the boys’ side everyone was spelled down except Sandy, but
on the girls’ side there were three proud little white girls
left standing and Sandy came near spelling them down, too,
until he put the <span class='it'>e</span> before <span class='it'>i</span> in “chief,” and the girls’ side won,
to the disgust of the boys, and the two colored girls, who
wanted Sandy to win.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After school Sandy went uptown with Buster to buy
books, but there was so large a crowd of children in the
bookstore that it was five o’clock before he was waited on
and his list filled. When he reached home, Aunt Hager was
at the kitchen-stove frying an eggplant for supper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You stayin’ out mighty long,” she said without taking
her attention from the stove.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where’s papa?” Sandy asked eagerly. He wanted to show
Jimboy his new books—a big geography, with pictures of
animals in it, and a <span class='it'>Nature Story Reader</span> that he knew his father
would like to see.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Look in yonder,” said Hager, pointing towards Annjee’s
bedroom.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy rushed in, then stopped, because there was no one
there. Suddenly a queer feeling came over him and he put
his books down on the bed. Jimboy’s clothes were no longer
hanging against the wall where his working-shirts and overalls
were kept. Then Sandy looked under the bed. His father’s
old suit-case was not there either, nor his work-shoes,
nor his Sunday patent-leathers. And the guitar was missing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where’s papa?” he asked again, running back to the
kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can’t you see he ain’t here?” replied his grandmother,
busily turning slices of eggplant with great care in the skillet.
“Gone—that’s where he is—a lazy nigger. Told me to
tell Annjee he say goodbye, ’cause his travellin’ blues done
come on .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.! Huh! Jimboy’s yo’ pappy, chile, but he sho
ain’t worth his salt! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. an’ I’s right glad he’s took his clothes
an’ left here, maself.”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap12'>CHAPTER XII</h1></div>

<h3>Hard Winter</h3>

<p class='pindent'>September passed and the corn-stalks in the garden were
cut. There were no more apples left on the trees, and chilly
rains came to beat down the falling leaves from the maples
and the elms. Cold and drearily wet October passed, too,
with no hint of Indian summer or golden forests. And as yet
there was no word from the departed Jimboy. Annjee worried
herself sick, as usual, hoping every day that a letter
would come from this wandering husband whom she loved.
And each night she hurried home from Mrs. Rice’s, looked
on the parlor table for the mail, and found none. Harriett
had not written, either, since she went away with the carnival,
and Hager never mentioned her youngest daughter’s
name. Nor did Hager mention Jimboy except when Annjee
asked her, after she could hold it no longer: “Are you sure
the mail-man ain’t left me a letter today?” And then Aunt
Hager would reply impatiently: “You think I’d a et it if he
did? You know that good-for-nothin’, upsettin’ scoundrel
ain’t wrote!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But in spite of daily disappointments from the postal service
Annjee continued to rush from Mrs. Rice’s hot kitchen
as soon after dinner as she could and to trudge through the
chill October rains, anxious to feel in the mail-box outside
her door, then hope against hope for a letter inside on the
little front-room table—which would always be empty. She
caught a terrible cold tramping through the damp streets,
forgetting to button her cloak, then sitting down with her
wet shoes on when she got home, a look of dumb disappointment
in her eyes, too tired and unhappy to remove her
clothes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’s a fool,” said her mother, whose tongue was often
much sharper than the meaning behind it. “Mooning after a
worthless nigger like Jimboy. I tole you years ago he was no
good, when he first come, lookin’ like he ought to be
wearin’ short pants, an’ out here courtin’ you. Ain’t none o’
them bell-hoppin’, racehoss-followin’ kind o’ darkies worth
havin’, an’ that’s all Jimboy was when you married him an’
he ain’t much mo’n that now. An’ you older’n he is, too!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But you know why I married, don’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You, Sandy, go outdoors an’ get me some wood fo’ this
stove.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Yes, I knows why, because he were de father o’
that chile you was ’bout to bring here, but I don’t see why it
couldn’t just well been some o’ these steady, hard-workin’
Stanton young men’s what was courtin’ you at de same
time.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But, chile or no chile, I couldn’t hear nothin’ but
Jimboy, Jimboy, Jimboy! I told you you better stay in de
high school an’ get your edication, but no, you had to marry
this Jimboy. Now you see what you got, don’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, he ain’t been so bad, ma! And I don’t care, I love
him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Umn-huh! Try an’ live on love, daughter! Just try an’ live
on love.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You’s made a mistake, that’s all, honey.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I
guess there ain’t no use talkin’ ’bout it now. Take off yo’ wet
shoes ’fore you catch yo’ death o’ cold!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>On Thanksgiving at Mrs. Rice’s, so Annjee reported, they
had turkey with chestnut dressing; but at Aunt Hager’s she
and Sandy had a nice juicy possum, a present from old man
Logan, parboiled and baked sweet and brown with yams in
the pan. Aunt Hager opened a jar of peach preserves. And
she told Sandy to ask Jimmy Lane in to dinner because,
since his mother died, he wasn’t faring so well and the people
he was staying with didn’t care much about him. But
since Jimmy had quit school, Sandy didn’t see him often;
and the day before Thanksgiving he couldn’t find him at all,
so they had no company to help them eat the possum.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The week after Thanksgiving Annjee fell ill and had to go
to bed. She had the grippe, Aunt Hager said, and she began
to dose her with quinine and to put hot mustard-plasters on
her back and gave her onion syrup to drink, but it didn’t
seem to do much good, and finally she had to send Sandy
for Dr. McDillors.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“System’s all run down,” said the doctor. “Heavy cold on
the chest—better be careful. And stay in the bed!” But the
warning was unnecessary. Annjee felt too tired and weak
ever to rise, and only the mail-man’s whistle blowing at
somebody else’s house would cause her to try to lift her
head. Then she would demand weakly: “Did he stop here?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager’s home now was like a steam laundry. The kitchen
was always hung with lines of clothes to dry, and in the late
afternoon and evenings the ironing-board was spread from
the table to a chair-back in the middle of the floor. All of the
old customers were sending their clothes to Hager again
during the winter. And since Annjee was sick, bringing no
money into the house on Saturdays, the old woman had
even taken an extra washing to do. Being the only wage-earner,
Hager kept the suds flying—but with the wet
weather she had to dry the clothes in the kitchen most of
the time, and when Sandy came home from school for
lunch, he would eat under dripping lines of white folks’ garments
while he listened to his mother coughing in the next
room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the other rooms of the house there were no stoves, so
the doors were kept open in order that the heat might pass
through from the kitchen. They couldn’t afford to keep
more than one fire going; therefore the kitchen was living-room,
dining-room, and work-room combined. In the
mornings Sandy would jump out of bed and run with his
clothes in his hands to the kitchen-stove, where his grandmother
would have the fire blazing, the coffee-pot on, and a
great tub of water heating for the washings. And in the
evenings after supper he would open his geography and
read about the strange countries far away, the book spread
out on the oilcloth-covered kitchen-table. And Aunt Hager,
if her ironing was done, would sit beside the stove and doze,
while Annjee tossed and groaned in her chilly bedroom.
Only in the kitchen was it really bright and warm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the afternoons when Sandy came home from school
he would usually find Sister Johnson helping Hager with
her ironing, and keeping up a steady conversation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dis gonna be a hard winter. De papers say folks is out o’
work ever’where, an’, wid all dis sleet an’ rain, it’s a terror
fo’ de po’ peoples, I tells you! Now, ma Tom, he got a good
job tendin’ de furnace at de Fair Buildin’, so I ain’t doin’
much washin’ long as he’s workin’—but so many colored
men’s out o’ work here, wid Christmas comin’, it sho’ is too
bad! An’ you, Sis Williams, wid yo’ daughter sick in bed!
Any time yo’ clothes git kinder heavy fo’ you, I ain’t mind
helpin’ you out. Jest send dis chile atter me or holler ’cross
de yard if you kin made me hear! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. How you press dis
dress, wid de collar turn up or down? Which way do Mis’
Dunset like it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I always presses it down,” returned Hager, who was ironing
handkerchiefs and towels on the table. “Better let me
iron that, an’ you take these here towels.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right,” agreed Sister Johnson, “ ’cause you knows
how yo’ white folks likes dey things, an’ I don’t. Folks have
so many different ways!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sho do,” said Hager. “I washed for a woman once what
even had her sheets starched.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But you’s sure got a fine repertation as a washer, Sis
Williams. One o’ de white ladies what I washes fo’ say you
washes beautiful.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I reckon white folks does think right smart of me,” said
Hager proudly. “They always likes you when you tries to do
right.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When you tries to do yo’ work right, you means. Dey
ain’t carin’ nothin’ ’bout you ’yond workin’ fo’ ’em. Ain’t
dey got all de little niggers settin’ off in one row at dat
school whar Sandy an’ Willie-Mae go at? I’s like Harriett—ain’t
got no time fo’ white folks maself, ’ceptin’ what little
money dey pays me. You ain’t been run out o’ yo’ home like
I is, Hager.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy, make haste, go fetch my pipe from
over to de house, an’ don’t stay all day playin’ wid Willie-Mae!
Tote it here quick! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ you oughter hear de way
white folks talks ’bout niggers. Says dey’s lazy, an’ says dey
stinks, an’ all. Huh! Dey ought to smell dey-selves! You’s
smelled white peoples when dey gets to sweatin’ ain’t you?
Smells jest like sour cream, only worser, kinder sickenin’
like. And some o’ dese foriners what’s been eating garlic—phew!
Lawdy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Sandy returned with the pipe, the conversation
had shifted to the deaths in the colored community.
“Hager, folks dyin’ right an’ left already dis winter. We’s had
such a bad fall, dat’s de reason why. You know dat no-’count
Jack Smears passed away last Sunday. Dey had his funeral
yesterday an’ I went. Good thing he belonged to de lodge,
too, else he’d been buried in de po’-field, ’cause he ain’t left
even de copper cents to put on his eyes. Lodge beared his
funeral bill, but I heard more’n one member talkin’ ’bout
how dey was puttin’ a ten-dollar nigger in a hundred-dollar
coffin! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ his wife were at de funeral. Yes, sir! A hussy!
After she done left him last year wid de little chillens to take
care of an’ she runnin’ round de streets showin’ off. Dere
she sot, big as life, in front wid de moaners, long black veil
on her face and done dyed her coat black, an’ all de time
Reverend Butler been preachin’ ’bout how holy Jack were,
she turn an’ twist an’ she coughed an’ she whiffled an’
blowed an’ she wiped—tryin’ her best to cry an’ couldn’t,
deceitful as she is! Then she jest broke out to screamin’, but
warn’t a tear in her eye; makin’ folks look at her, dat’s all,
’cause she ain’t cared nothin’ ’bout Jack. She been livin’ in
de Bottoms since last Feb’ary wid a young bell-hop ain’t
much older’n her own son, Bert!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do Jesus!” said Hager. “Some womens is awful.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Worse’n dat,” said Sister Johnson.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Lawdy! Listen at
dat sleet beatin’ on dese winders! Sho gwine be a real winter!
An’ how time do pass. Ain’t but t’ree mo’ weeks till
Christmas!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Truth!” said Sandy’s grandmother. “An’ we ain’t gwine
have no money a-tall. Ain’t no mo’n got through payin’ ma
taxes good, an’ de interest on ma mortgage, when Annjee
get sick here! Lawd, I tells you, po’ colored womens have it
hard!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sho do!” said Sister Johnson, sucking at her pipe as she
ironed. “How long you been had this house, Sis Williams?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Fo’ nigh on forty years, ever sence Cudge an’ me come
here from Montgomery. An’ I been washin’ fo’ white folks
ever’ week de Lawd sent sence I been here, too. Bought this
house washin’, and made as many payments myself as
Cudge come near; an’ raised ma chillens washin’; an’ when
Cudge taken sick an’ laid on his back for mo’n a year, I taken
care o’ him washin’; an’ when he died, paid de funeral bill
washin’, ’cause he ain’t belonged to no lodge. Sent Tempy
through de high school and edicated Annjee till she marry
that onery pup of a Jimboy, an’ Harriett till she left home.
Yes, sir. Washin’, an’ here I is with me arms still in de
tub! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But they’s one mo’ got to go through school yet, an’
that’s ma little Sandy. If de Lawd lets me live, I’s gwine make
a edicated man out o’ him. He’s gwine be another Booker T.
Washington.” Hager turned a voluminous white petticoat
on the ironing-board as she carefully pressed its embroidered
hem. “I ain’t never raised no boy o’ ma own yet, so I
wants this one o’ Annjee’s to ’mount to something. I wants
him to know all they is to know, so’s he can help this black
race o’ our’n to come up and see de light and take they
places in de world. I wants him to be a Fred Douglass
leadin’ de people, that’s what, an’ not followin’ in de tracks
o’ his good-for-nothin’ pappy, worthless an’ wanderin’ like
Jimboy is.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, don’t say that, ma,” Annjee cried weakly from her bed
in the other room. “Jimboy’s all right, but he’s just too smart
to do this heavy ditch-digging labor, and that’s all white
folks gives the colored a chance at here in Stanton; so he
had to leave.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There you go excitin’ yo’self agin, an’ you sick. I thought
you was asleep. I ain’t meant nothin’, honey. Course he’s all
right,” Hager said to quiet her daughter, but she couldn’t resist
mumbling: “But I ain’t seen him doin’ you no good.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, he ain’t beat her, has he?” asked Sister Johnson,
who, for the sake of conversation, often took a contrary
view-point. “I’s knowed many a man to beat his wife. Tom
used to tap me a few times ’fo’ I found out a way to stop
him, but dat ain’t nedder here nor dere!” She folded a towel
decisively and gave it a vigorous rub with the hot iron. “Did
I ever tell you ’bout de man lived next do’ to us in Cairo
what cut his wife in de stomach wid a razor an’ den stood
ovah her when de doctor was sewin’ her up moanin’: ‘I don’t
see why I cut her in de stomach! O, Lawd! She always told
me she ain’t want to be cut in de stomach!’.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ it warn’t
two months atter dat dat he done sliced her in de stomach
agin when she was tryin’ to git away from him! He were a
mean nigger, that man were!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Annjee, is you taken yo’ medicine yet? It’s past fo’
o’clock,” Hager called. “Sandy, here, take this fifteen cents,
chile, and run to de store an’ get me a soup bone. I gwine try
an’ make a little broth for yo’ mother. An’ don’t be gone all
day neither, ’cause I got to send these clothes back to Mis’
Dunset.” Hager was pressing out the stockings as she
turned her attention to the conversation again. “They tells
me, Sister Johnson, that Seth Jones done beat up his wife
something terrible.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He did, an’ he oughter! She was always stayin’ way from
home an’ settin’ up in de church, not even cookin’ his meals,
an’ de chillens runnin’ ragged in de street.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s a religious frantic, ain’t she?” asked Hager.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “You
Sandy, hurry up, sir! an’ go get that soup bone!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, chile, ’tain’t that,” said Sister Johnson. “She ain’t
carin’ so much ’bout religion. It’s Reverend Butler she’s runnin’
atter. Ever’ time de church do’ opens, there she sets in
de preacher’s mouth, tryin’ to ’tract de shepherd from his
sheep. She de one what taken her husband’s money an’
bought Reverend Butler dat gold-headed walkin’-cane he’s
got. I ain’t blame Seth fer hittin’ her bap on de head, an’ she
takin’ his money an’ buyin’ canes fer ministers!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sadie Butler’s in my school,” said Sandy, putting on his
stocking cap. “Reverend Butler’s her stepfather.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shut up! You hears too much,” said Hager. “Ain’t I told
you to go on an’ get that soup bone?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m. I’m going.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An’ I reckon I’ll be movin’ too,” said Sister Johnson,
placing the iron on the stove. “It’s near ’bout time to be
startin’ Tom’s supper. I done told Willie-Mae to peel de
taters ’fo’ I come ovah here, but I spects she ain’t done it.
Dat’s de worse black gal to get to work! Soon as she eat, she
run outdo’s to de privy to keep from washin’ de dishes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy started to the store, and Sister Johnson, with on
old coat over her head, scooted across the back yard to her
door. It was a chill December afternoon and the steady sleet
stung Sandy in the face as he ran along, but the air smelled
good after the muggy kitchen and the stale scent of Annjee’s
sick-room. Near the corner Sandy met the mail-man, his
face red with cold.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Got anything for us?” asked the little boy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” said the man as he went on without stopping.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy wished his mother would get well soon. She looked
so sad lying there in bed. And Aunt Hager was always busy
washing and ironing. His grandmother didn’t even have
time to mend his stockings any more and there were great
holes in the heels when he went to school. His shoes were
worn out under the bottoms, too. Yesterday his mother had
said: “Honey, you better take them high-brown shoes of
mine from underneath the bed and put ’em on to keep your
feet dry this wet weather. I can’t afford to buy you none
now, and you ain’t got no rubbers.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You want me to wear old women’s shoes like Jimmy
Lane?” Sandy objected. “I won’t catch cold with my feet wet.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Hager from the kitchen overruled his objections.
“Put on them shoes, sir, an’ don’t argue with yo’ mother, an’
she sick in de bed! Put ’em on an’ hush yo’ mouth, till you
get something better.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So this morning at recess Sandy had to fight a boy for
calling him “sissy” on account of his mother’s shoes he was
wearing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But only a week and a half more and the Christmas vacation
would come! Uptown the windows were already full of
toys, dolls, skates, and sleds. Sandy wanted a Golden Flyer
sled for Christmas. That’s all he wanted—a Golden Flyer
with flexible rudders, so you could guide it easy. Boy!
Wouldn’t he come shooting down that hill by the Hickory
Woods where the fellows coasted every year! They cost
only four dollars and ninety-five cents and surely his
grandma could afford that for him, even if his mother was
sick and she had just paid her taxes. Four ninety-five—but
he wouldn’t want anything else if Aunt Hager would buy
that sled for Santa Claus to bring him! Every day, after
school, he passed by the store, where many sleds were displayed,
and stood for a long time looking at this Golden
Flyer of narrow hard-wood timbers varnished a shiny yellow.
It had bright red runners and a beautiful bar with
which to steer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he told Aunt Hager about it, all she said was: “Boy,
is you crazy?” But Annjee smiled from her bed and answered:
“Wait and see.” Maybe they would get it for him—but
Santa Claus was mean to poor kids sometimes, Sandy
knew, when their parents had no money.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Fifteen cents’ worth of hamburger,” he said absentmindedly
to the butcher when he reached the market.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
And when Sandy came home his grandmother whipped
him for bringing ground meat instead of the soup bone for
which she had sent him.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>So the cold days passed, heavy and cloudy, with Annjee
still in bed, and the kitchen full of garments hanging on
lines to dry because, out of doors, the frozen rain kept
falling. Always in Hager’s room a great pile of rough-dried
clothes eternally waited to be ironed. Sandy helped his
grandmother as much as he could, running errands, bringing
in coal and wood, pumping water in the mornings before
school, and sitting by his mother in the evenings,
reading to her from his <span class='it'>Nature Story Reader</span> when it wasn’t
too cold in her bedroom.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee was able to sit up now and she said she felt better,
but she looked ashen and tired. She wanted to get back to
work, so she would have a little money for Christmas and be
able to help Hager with the doctor’s bill, but she guessed
she couldn’t. And she was still worrying about Jimboy.
Three months had passed since he went away—a longer
time than usual that he hadn’t written. Maybe something
<span class='it'>had</span> happened to him. Maybe he was out of work and hungry,
because this was a hard winter. <span class='it'>Maybe he was dead!</span></p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, my God, no!” Annjee cried as the thought struck her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But one Sunday morning, ten days before Christmas, the
door-bell rang violently and a special-delivery boy stood on
the front porch. Annjee’s heart jumped as she sat up in bed.
She had seen the youngster approaching from the window.
Word from Jimboy surely—or word about him!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ma! Sandy! Go quick and see what it is!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Letter for Mrs. Annjelica Rodgers,” said the boy, stamping
the snow from his feet. “Sign here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>While Sandy held the door open, letting the cold wind
blow through the house, Hager haltingly scrawled something
on the boy’s pink pad. Then, with the child behind
her, the old woman hurried to her daughter’s bed with the
white envelope.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s from him!” Annjee cried; “I know it’s from Jimboy,”
as she tore open the letter with trembling fingers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A scrap of dirty tablet-paper fell on the quilt, and Annjee
quickly picked it up. It was written in pencil in a feminine
hand.</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'><span class='sc'>Dear Sister</span>,</p>

<p class='pindent'>I am stranded in Memphis, Tenn, and the show has gone on
to New Orleans. I can’t buy anything to eat because I am
broke and don’t know anybody in this town. Annjee, please
send me my fare to come home and mail it to the Beale
Street Colored Hotel. I’m sending my love to you and
mama.</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'>Your baby sister,</p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'><span class='sc'>Harriett</span></p>

</div>

<div><h1 id='chap13'>CHAPTER XIII</h1></div>

<h3>Christmas</h3>

<p class='pindent'>“Po’ little thing,” said Hager. “Po’ little thing. An’ here we
ain’t got no money.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The night before, on Saturday, Hager had bought a sack
of flour, a chunk of salt pork, and some groceries. Old Dr.
McDillors had called in the afternoon, and she had paid
him, too.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I reckon it would take mo’n thirty dollars to send fo’
Harriett, an’ Lawd knows we ain’t got three dollars in de
house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee lay limply back on her pillows staring out of the
window at the falling snow. She had been crying.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But never mind,” her mother went on, “I’s gwine see Mr.
John Frank tomorrow an’ see can’t I borry a little mo’
money on this mortgage we’s got with him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So on Monday morning the old lady left her washing and
went uptown to the office of the money-lender, but the
clerk there said Mr. Frank had gone to Chicago and would
not be back for two weeks. There was nothing the clerk
could do about it, since he himself could not lend money.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That afternoon Annjee sat up in bed and wrote a long letter
to Harriett, telling her of their troubles, and before she
sealed it, Sandy saw his mother slip into the envelope the
three one-dollar bills that she had been guarding under her
pillow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There goes your Santa Claus,” she said to her son, “but
maybe Harriett’s hungry. And you don’t want Aunt Harrie
to be hungry, do you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No’m,” Sandy said.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>The grey days passed and Annjee was able to get up and
sit beside the kitchen-stove while her mother ironed. Every
afternoon Sandy went downtown to look at the shop widows,
gay with Christmas things. And he would stand and
stare at the Golden Flyer sleds in Edmondson’s hardware-shop.
He could feel himself coasting down a long hill on
one of those light, swift, red and yellow coasters, the envy of
all the other boys, white and colored, who looked on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he went home, he described the sled minutely to
Annjee and Aunt Hager and wondered aloud if that might
be what he would get for Christmas. But Hager would say:
“Santa Claus are just like other folks. He don’t work for
nothin’!” And his mother would add weakly from her chair:
“This is gonna be a slim Christmas, honey, but mama’ll see
what she can do.” She knew his heart was set on a sled, and
he could tell that she knew; so maybe he would get it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One day Annjee gathered her strength together, put a
woollen dress over her kimono, wrapped a heavy cloak
about herself, and went out into the back yard. Sandy, from
the window, watched her picking her way slowly across the
frozen ground towards the outhouse. At the trash-pile near
the alley fence she stopped and, stooping down, began to
pull short pieces of boards and wood from the little pile of
lumber that had been left there since last summer by the
carpenters who had built the porch. Several times in her labor
she rose and leaned weakly against the back fence for
support, and once Sandy ran out to see if he could help her,
but she told him irritably to get back in the house out of the
weather or she would put him to bed without any supper.
Then, after placing the boards that she had succeeded in
unearthing in a pile by the path, she came wearily back to
the kitchen, trembling with cold.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m mighty weak yet,” she said to Hager, “but I’m sure
much better than I was. I don’t want to have the grippe no
more.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy, look in the mail-box and see has the mail-man
come by yet.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the little boy returned empty-handed, he heard his
mother talking about old man Logan, who used to be a carpenter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maybe he can make it,” she was saying, but stopped
when she heard Sandy behind her. “I guess I’ll lay back
down now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager wrung out the last piece of clothes that she
had been rinsing. “Yes, chile,” she said, “you go on and lay
down. I’s gwine make you some tea after while.” And the old
woman went outdoors to take from the line the frozen garments
blowing in the sharp north wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After supper that night Aunt Hager said casually: “Well, I
reckon I’ll run down an’ see Brother Logan a minute whilst
I got nothin’ else to do. Sandy, don’t you let de fire go out,
and take care o’ yo’ mama.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m,” said the little boy, drawing pictures on the oilcloth-covered
table with a pin. His grandmother went out
the back door and he looked through the frosty window to
see which way she was going. The old woman picked up the
boards that his mother had piled near the alley fence, and
with them in her arms she disappeared down the alley in the
dark.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After a little, Aunt Hager returned puffing and blowing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can he do it?” Annjee demanded anxiously from the
bedroom when she heard her mother enter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, chile,” Hager answered. “Lawd, it sho is cold out
yonder! Whee! Lemme git here to this stove!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>That night it began to snow again. The great heavy flakes
fell with languid gentility over the town and silently the
whiteness covered everything. The next morning the snow
froze to a hard sparkling crust on roofs and ground, and in
the late afternoon when Sandy went to return the Reinharts’
clothes, you could walk on top of the snow without
sinking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At the back door of the Reinharts’ house a warm smell of
plum-pudding and mince pies drifted out as he waited for
the cook to bring the money. When she returned with seventy-five cents,
she had a nickel for Sandy, too. As he slid
along the street, he saw in many windows gay holly wreaths
with red berries and big bows of ribbon tied to them. Sandy
wished he could buy a holly wreath for their house. It might
make his mother’s room look cheerful. At home it didn’t
seem like Christmas with the kitchen full of drying clothes,
and no Christmas-tree.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy wondered if, after all, Santa Claus might, by some
good fortune, bring him that Golden Flyer sled on Christmas
morning. How fine this hard snow would be to coast
on, down the long hill past the Hickory Woods! How light
and swift he would fly with his new sled! Certainly he had
been a good boy, carrying Aunt Hager’s clothes for her,
waiting on his mother when she was in bed, emptying the
slops and cutting wood every day. And at night when he said
his prayers:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Now I lay me down to sleep.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Pray the Lord my soul to keep.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>If I should die before I wake,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Pray the Lord my soul to take.</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>he had added with great earnestness: “And let Santa bring
me a Golden Flyer sled, please, Lord. Amen.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy knew very well that there wasn’t really any
Santa Claus! He knew in his heart that Hager and his
mother were Santa Claus—and that they didn’t have any
money. They were poor people. He was wearing his mama’s
shoes, as Jimmy Lane had once done. And his father and
Harriett, who used to make the house gay, laughing and
singing, were far away somewhere.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. There wasn’t any
Santa Claus.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t care,” he said, tramping over the snow in the twilight
on his way from the Reinharts’.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christmas Eve. Candles and poinsettia flowers. Wreaths
of evergreen. Baby trees hung with long strands of tinsel
and fragile ornaments of colored glass. Sandy passed the
windows of many white folks’ houses where the curtains
were up and warm floods of electric light made bright the
cozy rooms. In Negro shacks, too, there was the dim
warmth of oil-lamps and Christmas candles glowing. But at
home there wasn’t even a holly wreath. And the snow was
whiter and harder than ever on the ground.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tonight, though, there were no clothes drying in the
kitchen when he went in. The ironing-board had been put
away behind the door, and the whole place was made tidy
and clean. The fire blazed and crackled in the little range;
but nothing else said Christmas—no laughter, no tinsel, no
tree.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee had been about all day, still weak, but this afternoon
she had made a trip to the store for a quarter’s worth
of mixed candies and nuts and a single orange, which she
had hidden away until morning. Hager had baked a little
cake, but there was no frosting on it such as there had been
in other years, and there were no strange tissue-wrapped
packages stuck away in the corners of trunks and drawers
days ahead of time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Although the little kitchen was warm enough, the two
bedrooms were chilly, and the front room was freezing-cold
because they kept the door there closed all the time. It was
hard to afford a fire in one stove, let alone two, Aunt Hager
kept saying, with nobody working but herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’s thinking about Harriett,” she remarked after their
Christmas Eve supper as she rocked before the fire, “and
how I’s always tried to raise her right.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And I’m thinking about—well, there ain’t no use mentionin’
him,” Annjee said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A sleigh slid by with jingling bells and shouts of laughter
from the occupants, and a band of young people passed on
their way to church, singing carols. After a while another
sleigh came along with a jolly sound.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Santa Claus!” said Annjee, smiling at her serious little
son. “You better hurry and go to bed, because he’ll be coming
soon. And be sure to hang up your stocking.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy was afraid that she was fooling, and, as he
pulled off his clothes, he left his stockings on the floor,
stuck into the women’s shoes he had been wearing. Then,
leaving the bedroom door half open so that the heat and a
little light from the kitchen would come in, he climbed into
his mother’s bed. But he wasn’t going to close his eyes yet.
Sandy had discovered long ago that you could hear and see
many things by not going to sleep when the family expected
you to; therefore he remained awake tonight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mother was talking to Aunt Hager now: “I don’t
think he’ll charge us anything, do you, ma?” And the old
woman answered: “No, chile, Brother Logan’s been tryin’
to be ma beau for twenty years, an’ he ain’t gonna charge us
nothin’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee came into the half-dark bedroom and looked at
Sandy, lying still on the side of the bed towards the window.
Then she took down her heavy coat from the wall and, sitting
on the edge of a chair, began to pull on her rubbers. In
a few moments he heard the front door close softly. His
mother had gone out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Where could she be going, he wondered, this time of
night? He heard her footsteps crunching the hard snow and,
rolling over close to the window, he pulled aside the shade a
little and looked out. In the moonlight he saw Annjee moving
slowly down the street past Sister Johnson’s house, walking
carefully over the snow like a very weak woman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mama’s still sick,” the child thought, with his nose
pressed against the cold window-pane. “I wish I could a
bought her a present today.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Soon an occasional snore from the kitchen told Sandy
that Hager dozed peacefully in her rocker beside the stove.
He sat up in bed, wrapped a quilt about his shoulders, and
remained looking out the window, with the shade hanging
behind his back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The white snow sparkled in the moonlight, and the trees
made striking black shadows across the yard. Next door at
the Johnsons’ all was dark and quiet, but across the street,
where white folks lived, the lights were burning brightly
and a big Christmas-tree with all its candles aglow stood in
the large bay window while a woman loaded it with toys.
Sandy knew that four children lived there, three boys and a
girl, whom he had often watched playing on the lawn.
Sometimes he wished he had a brother or sister to play with
him, too, because it was very quiet in a house with only
grown-ups about. And right now it was dismal and lonely to
be by himself looking out the window of a cold bedroom on
Christmas Eve.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then a woman’s cloaked figure came slowly back past
Sister Johnson’s house in the moonlight, and Sandy saw
that it was his mother returning, her head down and her
shadow moving blackly on the snow. You could hear the dry
grate of her heels on the frozen whiteness as she walked,
leaning forward, dragging something heavy behind her.
Sandy prepared to lie down quickly in bed again, but he
kept his eyes against the window-pane to see what Annjee
was pulling, and, as she came closer to the house, he could
distinguish quite clearly behind her a solid, home-made
sled bumping rudely over the snow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Before Annjee’s feet touched the porch, he was lying still
as though he had been asleep a long time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The morning sunlight was tumbling brightly into the
windows when Sandy opened his eyes and blinked at the
white world outside.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aren’t you ever going to get up?” asked Annjee, smiling
timidly above him. “It’s Christmas morning, honey. Come
see what Santa Claus brought you. Get up quick.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he didn’t want to get up. He knew what Santa Claus
had brought him and he wanted to stay in bed with his face
to the wall. It wasn’t a Golden Flyer sled—and now he
couldn’t even hope for one any longer. He wanted to pull
the covers over his head and cry, but, “Boy! You ain’t up
yet?” called Aunt Hager cheerily from the kitchen. “De little
Lawd Jesus is in His manger fillin’ all de world with
light. An’ old Santa done been here an’ gone! Get out from
there, chile, an’ see!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m coming, grandma,” said Sandy slowly, wiping his
tear-filled eyes and rolling out of bed as he forced his mouth
to smile wide and steady at the few little presents he saw on
the floor—for the child knew he was expected to smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O! A sled!” he cried in a voice of mock surprise that
wasn’t his own at all; for there it stood, heavy and awkward,
against the wall and beside it on the floor lay two picture-books
from the ten-cent store and a pair of white cotton
gloves. Above the sled his stocking, tacked to the wall, was
partly filled with candy, and the single orange peeped out
from the top.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the sled! Home-made by some rough carpenter, with
strips of rusty tin nailed along the wooden runners, and a
piece of clothes-line to pull it with!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s fine,” Sandy lied, as he tried to lift it and place it on
the floor as you would in coasting; but it was very heavy, and
too wide for a boy to run with in his hands. You could never
get a swift start. And a board was warped in the middle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s a nice sled, grandma,” he lied. “I like it, mama.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Logan made it for you,” his mother answered
proudly, happy that he was pleased. “I knew you wanted a
sled all the time.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s a nice sled,” Sandy repeated, grinning steadily as he
held the heavy object in his hands. “It’s an awful nice sled.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, make haste and look at de gloves, and de candy,
and them pretty books, too,” called Hager from the
kitchen, where she was frying strips of salt pork. “My, you
sho is a slow chile on Christmas mawin’! Come ’ere and
lemme kiss you.” She came to the bedroom and picked him
up in her arms. “Christmas gift to Hager’s baby chile! Come
on, Annjee, bring his clothes out here behind de stove an’
bring his books, too.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. This here’s Little Red Riding
Hood and the Wolf, and this here’s Hansee and Gretsle on
de cover—but I reckon you can read ’em better’n I
can.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Daughter, set de table. Breakfast’s ’bout ready now.
Look in de oven an’ see ’bout that corn-bread.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lawd,
this here Sandy’s just like a baby lettin’ ole Hager hold him
and dress him.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Put yo’ foot in that stocking, boy!” And
Sandy began to feel happier, sitting on his grandmother’s
lap behind the stove.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>Before noon Buster had come and gone, showing off his
new shoes and telling his friend about the train he had gotten
that ran on a real track when you wound it up. After dinner
Willie-Mae appeared bringing a naked rag doll and a set
of china dishes in a blue box. And Sister Johnson sent them
a mince pie as a Christmas gift.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Almost all Aunt Hager’s callers knocked at the back door,
but in the late afternoon the front bell rang and Annjee sent
Sandy through the cold parlor to answer it. There on the
porch stood his Aunt Tempy, with several gaily wrapped
packages in her arms. She was almost a stranger to Sandy,
yet she kissed him peremptorily on the forehead as he stood
in the doorway. Then she came through the house into the
kitchen, with much the air of a mistress of the manor descending
to the servants’ quarters.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lands sakes alive!” said Hager, rising to kiss her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tempy hugged Annjee, too, before she sat down, stiffly, as
though the house she was in had never been her home. To
little Willie-Mae she said nothing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m sorry I couldn’t invite you for Christmas dinner today,
but you know how Mr. Siles is,” Tempy began to explain
to her mother and sister. “My husband is home so
infrequently, and he doesn’t like a house full of company,
but of course Dr. and Mrs. Glenn Mitchell will be in later in
the evening. They drop around any time.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I had to
run down and bring you a few presents.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You haven’t
seen my new piano yet, have you, mother? I must come and
take you home with me some nice afternoon.” She smiled
appropriately, but her voice was hard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How is you an’ yo’ new church makin’ it?” asked Hager,
slightly embarrassed in the presence of her finely dressed
society daughter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wonderful!” Tempy replied. “Wonderful! Father Hill is
so dignified, and the services are absolutely refined! There’s
never anything niggerish about them—so you know,
mother, they suit me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’s glad you likes it,” said Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was an awkward silence; then Tempy distributed
her gifts, kissed them all as though it were her Christian
duty, and went her way, saying that she had calls to make at
Lawyer and Mrs. Moore’s, and Professor Booth’s, and
Madam Temple’s before she returned home. When she had
gone, everybody felt relieved—as though a white person
had left the house. Willie-Mae began to play again, and
Hager pushed her feet out of her shoes once more, while
Annjee went into the bedroom and lay down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy sat on the floor and untied his present, wrapped in
several thicknesses of pink tissue paper, and found, in a
bright Christmas box, a big illustrated volume of <span class='it'>Andersen’s
Fairy Tales</span> decorated in letters of gold. With its heavy pages
and fine pictures, it made the ten-cent-store books that
Hager had bought him appear cheap and thin. It made his
mother’s sled look cheap, too, and shamed all the other gifts
the ones he loved had given him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t want it,” he said suddenly, as loud as he could. “I
don’t want Tempy’s old book!” And from where he was sitting,
he threw it with all his might underneath the stove.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager gasped in astonishment. “Pick that up, sir,” she
cried, amazed. “Yo’ Aunt Tempy done bought you a fine
purty book an’ here you throwin’ it un’neath de stove in de
ashes! Lawd have mercy! Pick it up, I say, this minute!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t!” cried Sandy stubbornly. “I won’t! I like my sled
what you-all gave me, but I don’t want no old book from
Tempy! I won’t pick it up!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then the astonished Hager grabbed him by the scruff of
the neck and jerked him to his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do I have to whip you yet this holy day? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Pick up that
book, sir!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No!” he yelled.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She gave him a startled rap on the head with the back of her
hand. “Talkin’ sassy to yo’ old grandma an’ tellin’ her no!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What is it?” Annjee called from the bedroom, as Sandy
began to wail.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nothin’,” Hager replied, “ ’ceptin’ this chile’s done got
beside hisself an’ I has to hit him—that’s all!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy was not hurt by his grandmother’s easy rap. He
was used to being struck on the back of the head for misdemeanors,
and this time he welcomed the blow because it
gave him, at last, what he had been looking for all day—a
sufficient excuse to cry. Now his pent-up tears flowed without
ceasing while Willie-Mae sat in a corner clutching her
rag doll to her breast, and Tempy’s expensive gift lay in the
ashes beneath the stove.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap14'>CHAPTER XIV</h1></div>

<h3>Return</h3>

<p class='pindent'>After Christmas there followed a period of cold weather,
made bright by the winter sun shining on the hard crusty
snow, where children slid and rolled, and over which hay-wagons
made into sleighs on great heavy runners drove jingling
into town from the country. There was skating on the
frozen river and fine sledding on the hills beyond the
woods, but Sandy never went out where the crowds were
with his sled, because he was ashamed of it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After New Year’s Annjee went back to work at Mrs.
Rice’s, still coughing a little and still weak. But with bills to
pay and Sandy in need of shoes and stockings and clothes to
wear to school, she couldn’t remain idle any longer. Even
with her mother washing and ironing every day except the
Sabbath, expenses were difficult to meet, and Aunt Hager
was getting pretty old to work so hard. Annjee thought that
Tempy ought to help them a little, but she was too proud to
ask her. Besides, Tempy had never been very affectionate
towards her sisters even when they were all girls together—but
she ought to help look out for their mother. Hager,
however, when Annjee brought up the subject of Tempy’s
help, said that she was still able to wash, thank God, and
wasn’t depending on any of her children for anything—not
so long as white folks wore clothes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At school Sandy passed all of his mid-year tests and,
along with Sadie Butler, was advanced to the fifth A, but the
other colored child in the class, a little fat girl named Mary
Jones, failed and had to stay behind. Mary’s mother, a large
sulphur-yellow woman who cooked at the Drummer’s Hotel,
came to the school and told the teacher, before all the
children, just what she thought of her for letting Mary
fail—and her thoughts were not very complimentary to the
stiff, middle-aged white lady who taught the class. The
question of color came up, too, during the discussion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Look at ma chile settin’ back there behind all de white
ones,” screamed the sulphur-yellow woman. “An’ me payin’
as much taxes as anybody! You treats us colored folks like
we ain’t citizerzens—that’s what you does!” The argument
had to be settled in the principal’s office, where the teacher
went with the enraged mother, while the white children
giggled that a fat, yellow colored lady should come to
school to quarrel about her daughter’s not being promoted.
But the colored children in the class couldn’t laugh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>St. Valentine’s day came and Sadie Butler sent Sandy a
big red heart. But for Annjee, “the mail-man passed and
didn’t leave no news,” because Jimboy hadn’t written yet,
nor had Harriett thanked her for the three dollars she had
mailed to Memphis before Christmas. There were no letters
from anybody.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The work at Mrs. Rice’s was very heavy, because Mrs.
Rice’s sister, with two children, had come from Indiana to
spend the winter, and Annjee had to cook for them and
clean their rooms, too. But she was managing to save a little
money every week. She bought Sandy a new blue serge suit
with a Norfolk coat and knickerbocker pants. And then he
sat up very stiffly in Sterner’s studio and had his picture
taken.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The freckled-faced white boy, Paul Biggers, who sat
across from Sandy in school, delivered the <span class='it'>Daily Leader</span> to
several streets in Sandy’s neighborhood, and Sandy sometimes
went with him, helping to fold and throw the papers
in the various doorways. One night it was almost seven
o’clock when he got home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I had a great mind not to wait for you,” said Aunt Hager,
who had long had the table set for supper. “Wash yo’ face
an’ hands, sir! An’ brush that snow off yo’ coat ’fo’ you hang
it up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His grandmother took a pan of hot spoon-bread from the
oven and put it on the table, where the little oil-lamp
glowed warmly and the plain white dishes looked clean and
inviting. On the stove there was a skillet full of fried apples
and bacon, and Hager was making a pot of tea.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Umn-nn! Smells good!” said Sandy, speaking of everything
at once as he slid into his chair. “Gimme a lot o’ apples,
grandma.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is that de way you ask fo’ ’em, sir? Can’t you say please
no mo’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Please, ma’am,” said the boy, grinning, for Hager’s
sharpness wasn’t serious, and her old eyes were twinkling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>While they were eating, Annjee came in from work with
a small bucket of oyster soup in her hands. They heated this
and added it to their supper, and Sandy’s mother sat down
in front of the stove, with her feet propped up on the grate
to dry quickly. It was very comfortable in the little kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Seems like the snow’s melting,” said Annjee. “It’s kinder
sloppy and nasty underfoot.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Ain’t been no mail today,
has they?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, honey,” said Hager. “Leastwise, I been washin’ so
hard ain’t had no time to look in de box. Sandy, run there to
de front do’ an’ see. But I knows there ain’t nothin’, nohow.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Might be,” said Annjee as Sandy took a match and went
through the dark bedroom and parlor to the front porch.
There was no mail. But Sandy saw, coming across the slushy
dirty-white snow towards the house, a slender figure approaching
in the gloom. He waited, shivering in the doorway
a moment to see who it was; then all at once he yelled at
the top of his lungs: “Aunt Harrie’s here!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Pulling her by the hand, after having kissed and hugged
and almost choked her, he ran back to the kitchen. “Look,
here’s Aunt Harrie!” he cried. “Aunt Harrie’s home!” And
Hager turned from the table, upsetting her tea, and opened
wide her arms to take her to her bosom.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ma chile!” she shouted. “Done come home again! Ma
baby chile come home!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee hugged and kissed Harriett, too, as her sister sat
on Hager’s knees—and the kitchen was filled with sound,
warm and free and loving, for the prodigal returned.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ma chile’s come back!” her mother repeated over and
over. “Thank de Lawd! Ma chile’s back!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You want some fried apples, Harrie?” asked Sandy, offering
her his plate. “You want some tea?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, thank you, honey,” she replied when the excitement
had subsided and Aunt Hager had released her, with her little
black hat askew and the powder kissed off one side of her
face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She got up, shook herself, and removed her hat to brush
down her hair, but she kept her faded coat on as she laid her
little purse of metal mesh on the table. Then she sat down
on the chair that Annjee offered her near the fire. She was
thinner and her hair had been bobbed, giving her a boyish
appearance, like the black pages in old Venetian paintings.
But her lips were red and there were two little spots of
rouge burning on each cheek, although her eyes were dark
with heavy shadows as though she had been ill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager was worried. “Has you been sick, chile?” she
asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, mama,” Harriett said. “I’ve been all right—just had
a hard time, that’s all. I got mad, and quit the show in Memphis,
and they wouldn’t pay me—so that was that! The minstrels
left the carnival for the winter and started playing the
theatres, and the new manager was a cheap skate. I couldn’t
get along with him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you get my letter and the money?” Annjee asked.
“We didn’t have no more to send you, and afterwards, when
you didn’t write, I didn’t know if you got it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I got it and meant to thank you, sis, but I don’t know—just
didn’t get round to it. But, anyway, I’m out of the South now.
It’s a hell—I mean it’s an awful place if you don’t know anybody!
And more hungry niggers down there! I wonder who
made up that song about <span class='it'>Dear Old Southland</span>. There’s nothing
dear about it that I can see. Good God! It’s awful! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I’m
back.” She smiled. “Where’s Jimboy? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O, that’s right,
Annjee—you told me in the letter. But I sort-a miss him
around here. Lord, I hope he didn’t go to Memphis!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you find a job down there?” Annjee asked, looking
at her sister’s delicate hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure, I found a <span class='it'>job</span> all right,” Harriett replied in a tone
that made Annjee ask no more questions. “Jobs are like
hen’s teeth—try and find ’em.” And she shrugged her shoulders
as Sandy had so often seen her do, but she no longer
seemed to him like a little girl. She was grown-up and hard
and strange now, but he still loved her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aunt Harrie, I passed to the fifth A,” he announced
proudly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s wonderful,” she answered. “My, but you’re smart!
You’ll be a great man some day, sure, Sandy.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where’s you’ suit-case, honey?” Hager interrupted, too
happy to touch her food on the table or to take her eyes
away from the face of her returned child. “Didn’t you bring
it back with you? Where is it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure, I got it.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I’m gonna live at Maudel’s this
time, mama.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I left it at the station. I didn’t think you-all’d
want me here.” She tried to make the words careless-like,
but they were pitifully forced.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, honey!” Annjee cried, the tears coming.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The shadow of inner pain passed over Hager’s black face,
but the only reply she made was: “You’s growed up now,
chile. I reckon you knows what you’s doin’. You’s been ten
thousand miles away from yo’ mammy, an’ I reckon you
knows.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Come on, Sandy, let’s we eat.” Slowly the old
woman returned to the cold food on her plate. “Won’t you
eat something with us, daughter?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett’s eyes lowered and her shoulders drooped. “No,
mama, thank you. I’m—not hungry.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then a long, embarrassing silence followed while Hager
gulped at her tea, Sandy tried to swallow a mouthful of
bread that seemed to choke him, and Annjee stared stupidly
at the stove.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Finally Harriett said: “I got to go now.” She stood up to
button her coat and put on her hat. Then she took her metal
purse from the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maudel’ll be waiting for me, but I’ll be seeing you-all
again soon, I guess. Good-bye, Sandy honey! I got to
go.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Annjee, I got to go now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Good-bye, mama!” She
was trembling. As she bent down to kiss Hager, her purse
slipped out of her hands and fell in a little metal heap on the
floor. She stooped to pick it up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I got to go now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A tiny perfume-bottle in the bag had broken from the
fall, and as she went through the cold front room towards
the door, the odor of cheap and poignant drugstore violets
dripped across the house.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap15'>CHAPTER XV</h1></div>

<h3>One by One</h3>

<p class='pindent'>You could smell the spring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tain’t gwine be warm fo’ weeks yet!” Hager said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nevertheless, you could smell the spring. Little boys
were already running in the streets without their overcoats,
and the ground-hog had seen its shadow. Snow remained in
the fence corners, but it had melted on the roofs. The yards
were wet and muddy, but no longer white.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a sunny afternoon in late March that a letter came.
On his last delivery the mail-man stopped, dropped it in the
box—and Sandy saw him. It was addressed to his mother
and he knew it must be from Jimboy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go on an’ take it to her,” his grandma said, as soon as she
saw the boy coming with it in his hand. “I knows that’s what
you want to do. Go on an’ take it.” And she bent over her
ironing again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy ran almost all the way to Mrs. Rice’s, dropping the
letter more than once on the muddy sidewalk, so excited he
did not think to put it in his pocket. Into the big yard and
around to the white lady’s back door he sped—and it was
locked! He knocked loudly for a long time, and finally an
upper window opened and Annjee, a dust-rag around her
head, looked down, squinting in the sunlight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who’s there?” she called stridently, thinking of some
peddler or belated tradesman for whom she did not wish to
stop her cleaning.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy pantingly held up the letter and was about to say
something when the window closed with a bang. He could
hear his mother almost falling down the back stairs, she was
coming so fast. Then the key turned swiftly in the lock, the
door opened, and, without closing it, Annjee took the letter
from him and tore it open where she stood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s from Jimboy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy stood on the steps looking at his mother, her bosom
heaving, her sleeves rolled up, and the white cloth tied
about her head, doubly white against her dark-brown face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s in Detroit, it says.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Umn! I ain’t never seen him
write such a long letter. ‘I had a hard time this winter till I
landed here,’ it says, ‘but things look pretty good now, and
there is lots of building going on and plenty of work opening
up in the automobile plants .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a mighty lot of colored
folks here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hope you and Sandy been well. Sorry couldn’t
send you nothing Xmas, but I was in St. Paul broke.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Kiss
my son for me.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Tell ma hello even if she don’t want to
hear it. Your loving husband, Jimboy Rodgers.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee did her best to hold the letter with one hand and
pick up Sandy with the other, but he had grown considerably
during the winter and she was still a little weak from
her illness; so she bent down to his level and kissed him several
times before she re-read the letter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“From your daddy!” she said. “Umn-mn.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Come on in
here and warm yourself. Lemme see what he says
again!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She lighted the gas oven in the white kitchen
and sat down in front of it with her letter, forgetting the
clock and the approaching time for Mrs. Rice’s dinner, forgetting
everything. “A letter from my daddy! From my far-off
sugar-daddy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“From <span class='it'>my</span> daddy,” corrected Sandy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Say, gimme a
nickel to buy some marbles, mama. I wanta go play.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Without taking her eyes from the precious note Annjee
fumbled in her apron and found a coin. “Take it and go on!”
she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a dime. Sandy skipped around the house and down
the street in the chilly sunshine. He decided to stop at
Buster’s for a while before going home, since he had to pass
there anyway, and he found his friend in the house trying to
carve boats from clothes-pins with a rusty jack-knife.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Buster’s mother was a seamstress, and, after opening the
front door and greeting Sandy with a cheery “Hello,” she
returned to her machine and a friend who was calling on
her. She was a tall young light-mulatto woman, with skin
like old ivory. Maybe that was why Buster was so white. But
her husband was a black man who worked on the city’s
garbage-trucks and was active politically when election
time came, getting colored men to vote Republican. Everybody
said he made lots of money, but that he wasn’t really
Buster’s father.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The golden-haired child gave Sandy a butcher-knife and
together they whacked at the clothes-pins. You could hear
the two women talking plainly in the little sewing-room,
where the machine ran between snatches of conversation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes,” Buster’s mother was saying, “I have the hardest
time keeping that boy colored! He goes on just like he was
white. Do you know what he did last week? Cut all the blossoms
off my geranium plants here in the house, took them
to school, and gave them to Dorothy Marlow, in his grade.
And you know who Dorothy is, don’t you? Senator Marlow’s daughter!
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I said: ‘Buster, if you ever cut my flowers
to carry to any little girl again, I’ll punish you severely, but
if you cut them to carry to little white girls, I don’t know
what I’ll do with you.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Don’t you know they hang colored
boys for things like that?’ I wanted to scare him—because
you know there might be trouble even among kids in
school over such things.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I had to laugh.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her friend laughed too. “He’s a hot one, taking flowers to
the women already, and a white girl at that! You’ve got a
fast-working son, Elvira, I must say.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But, do you know,
when you first moved here and I saw you and the boy going
in and out, I thought sure you were both white folks. I didn’t
know you was colored till my husband said: ‘That’s Eddie’s
wife!’ You-all sure looked white to me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The machine started to whir, making the conversation
inaudible for a few minutes, and when Sandy caught their
words again, they were talking about the Elks’ club-house
that the colored people were planning to build.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can you go out?” Sandy demanded of Buster, sure they
were making no headway with the tough clothes-pins and
dull knives.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maybe,” said Buster. “I’ll go see.” And he went into the
other room and asked his mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Put on your overcoat,” she commanded. “It’s not summer yet.
And be back in here before dark.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, Vira,” the child said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two children went to Mrs. Rumford’s shop on the
corner and bought three cents’ worth of candy and seven
cents’ worth of peewees with which to play marbles when it
got warm. Then Sandy walked back past Buster’s house with
him and they played for a while in the street before Sandy
turned to run home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager was making mush for supper. She sent him to
the store for a pint bottle of milk as soon as he arrived, but
he forgot to take the bottle and had to come back for it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’d forget yo’ head if it wasn’t tied to you!” the old
woman reminded him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were just finishing supper when Annjee got home
with two chocolate eclairs in her coat-pocket, mashed together
against Jimboy’s letter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Huh! I’m crazy!” she said, running her hand down into
the sticky mess. “But listen, ma! He’s got a job and is doing
well in Detroit, Jimboy says.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And I’m going to him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You what?” Hager gasped, dropping her spoon in her
mush-bowl. “What you sayin’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I said I’m going to him, ma! I got to!” Annjee stood with
her coat and hat still on, holding the sticky letter. “I’m going
where my heart is, ma! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Oh, not today.” She put her
arms around her mother’s neck. “I don’t mean today, mama,
nor next week. I got to save some money first. I only got a
little now. But I mean I’m going to him soon’s I can. I can’t
help it, ma—I love him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawd, is you foolish!” cried Hager. “What’s you gwine
do with this chile, trapesin’ round after Jimboy? What you
gwine do if he leaves you in Detroiter or wherever he are?
What you gwine do then? You loves him! Huh!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But he ain’t gonna leave me in Detroit, ’cause I’m going
with him everywhere he goes,” she said, her eyes shining.
“He ain’t gonna leave me no more!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An’ Sandy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Couldn’t he stay with you, mama? And then maybe we’d
come back here and live, Jimboy and me, some time, when
we get a little money ahead, and could pay off the mortgage
on the house.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But there ain’t no use arguing, mama, I
got to go!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager had never seen Annjee so positive before; she sat
speechless, looking at the bowl of mush.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I got to go where it ain’t lonesome and where I ain’t unhappy—and
that’s where Jimboy is! I got to go soon as I
can.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager rose to put some water on the stove to heat for the
dishes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One by one you leaves me—Tempy, then Harriett, then
you,” she said. “But Sandy’s gonna stick by me, ain’t you,
son? He ain’t gwine leave his grandma.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The youngster looked at Hager, moving slowly about the
kitchen putting away the supper things.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And I’s gwine to make a fine man out o’ you, Sandy. I’s
gwine raise one chile right yet, if de Lawd lets me live—just
one chile right!” she murmured.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>That night the March wind began to blow and the window-panes
rattled. Sandy woke up in the dark, lying close
and warm beside his mother. When he went back to sleep
again, he dreamed that his Aunt Tempy’s Christmas book
had been turned into a chariot, and that he was riding
through the sky with Tempy standing very dignifiedly beside
him as he drove. And he couldn’t see anybody down on
earth, not even Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When his mother rolled out at six o’clock to go to work,
he woke up again, and while she dressed, he lay watching his
breath curl mistily upwards in the cold room. Outside the
window it was bleak and grey and the March wind, humming
through the leafless branches of the trees, blew terrifically.
He heard Aunt Hager in the kitchen poking at the
stove, making up a blaze to start the coffee boiling. Then
the front door closed when his mother went out and, as the
door slammed, the wind howled fiercely. It was nice and
warm in bed, so he lay under the heavy quilts half dreaming,
half thinking, until his grandmother shook him to get up.
And many were the queer, dream-drowsy thoughts that
floated through his mind—not only that morning, but almost
every morning while he lay beneath the warm quilts
until Hager had called him three or four times to get ready
for school.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He wondered sometimes whether if he washed and
washed his face and hands, he would ever be white. Someone
had told him once that blackness was only skin-deep.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And would he ever have a big house with electric
lights in it, like his Aunt Tempy—but it was mostly white
people who had such fine things, and they were mean to
colored.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Some white folks were nice, though. Earl was
nice at school, but not the little boys across the street, who
called him “nigger” every day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and not Mrs. Rice, who
scolded his mother.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Aunt Harrie didn’t like any white
folks at all.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But Jesus was white and wore a long, white
robe, like a woman’s, on the Sunday-school cards.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Once
Jimmy Lane said: “God damn Jesus” when the teacher
scolded him for not knowing his Bible lesson. He said it out
loud in church, too, and the church didn’t fall down on him,
as Sandy thought it might.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Grandma said it was a sin to
cuss and swear, but all the fellows at school swore—and Jimboy
did, too. But every time Sandy said “God damn,” he felt
bad, because Aunt Hager said God was mighty good and it
was wrong to take His name in vain. But he would like to
learn to say “God damn” without feeling anything like most
boys said it—just “God damn! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God damn! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God
damn!” without being ashamed of himself.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The Lord
never seemed to notice, anyhow.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And when he got big,
he wanted to travel like Jimboy. He wanted to be a railroad
engineer, but Harriett had said there weren’t any colored
engineers on trains.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What would he be, then? Maybe a
doctor; but it was more fun being an engineer and travelling
far away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy wished Annjee would take him with her when she
went to join Jimboy—but then Aunt Hager would be all by
herself, and grandma was so nice to him he would hate to
leave her alone. Who would cut wood for her then? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But
when he got big, he would go to Detroit. And maybe New
York, too, where his geography said they had the tallest
buildings in the world, and trains that ran under the
river.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He wondered if there were any colored people in
New York.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. How ugly African colored folks looked in the
geography—with bushy heads and wild eyes! Aunt Hager
said her mother was an African, but she wasn’t ugly and wild;
neither was Aunt Hager; neither was little dark Willie-Mae,
and they were all black like Africans.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And Reverend
Braswell was as black as ink, but he knew God.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God
didn’t care if people were black, did He? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What was God?
Was He a man or a lamb or what? Buster’s mother said God
was a light, but Aunt Hager said He was a King and had a
throne and wore a crown—she intended to sit down by His
side by and by.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Was Buster’s father white? Buster was
white and colored both. But he didn’t look like he was colored.
What made Buster not colored? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And what made
girls different from boys? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Once when they were playing
house, Willie-Mae told him how girls were different from
boys, but they didn’t know why. Now Willie-Mae was in the
seventh grade and had hard little breasts that stuck out
sharp-like, and Jimmy Lane said dirty things about Willie-Mae.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Once he asked his mother what his navel was for
and she said, “Layovers to catch meddlers.” What did that
mean? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And how come ladies got sick and stayed in bed
when they had babies? Where did babies come from, anyhow?
Not from storks—a fairy-story like Santa Claus.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Did God love people who told fairy-stories and lied to kids
about storks and Santa Claus? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Santa Claus was no good,
anyhow! God damn Santa Claus for not bringing him the
sled he wanted Christmas! It was all a lie about Santa Claus!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sound of Hager pouring coal on the fire and dragging
her wash-tubs across the kitchen floor to get ready for
work broke in on Sandy’s drowsy half-dreams, and as he
rolled over in bed, his grandmother, hearing the springs
creak, called loudly: “You Sandy! Get up from there! It’s
seven and past! You want to be late gettin’ to yo’ school?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m, I’m coming, grandma!” he said under the quilts.
“But it’s cold in here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You knows you don’t dress in yonder! Bring them
clothes on out behind this stove, sir.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m.” So with a kick of the feet his covers went flying
back and Sandy ran to the warmth of the little kitchen,
where he dressed, washed, and ate. Then he yelled for
Willie-Mae—when he felt like it—or else went on to school
without her, joining some of the boys on the way.</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:center;'>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</p>

<p class='pindent'>So spring was coming and Annjee worked diligently at
Mrs. Rice’s day after day. Often she did something extra for
Mrs. Rice’s sister and her children—pressed a shirtwaist or
ironed some stockings—and so added a few quarters or
maybe even a dollar to her weekly wages, all of which she
saved to help carry her to Jimboy in Detroit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For ten years she had been cooking, washing, ironing,
scrubbing—and for what? For only the few weeks in a year,
or a half-year, when Jimboy would come home from some
strange place and take her in his strong arms and kiss her
and murmur: “Annjee, baby!” That’s what she had been
working for—then the dreary months were as nothing, and
the hard years faded away. But now he had been gone all
winter, and, from his letter, he might not come back soon,
because he said Detroit was a fine place for colored
folks.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But Stanton—well, Annjee thought there must
surely be better towns, where a woman wouldn’t have to
work so hard to live.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And where Jimboy was.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So before the first buds opened on the apple-tree in the
back yard, Annjee had gone to Detroit, leaving Sandy behind
with his grandmother. And when the apple-blossoms
came in full bloom, there was no one living in the little
house but a grey-headed old woman and her grandchild.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One by one they leaves you,” Hager said slowly. “One by
one yo’ chillen goes.”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap16'>CHAPTER XVI</h1></div>

<h3>Nothing but Love</h3>

<p class='pindent'>“A year ago tonight was de storn what blowed ma porch
away! You ’members, honey? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Done seem like this year
took more’n ma porch, too. My baby chile’s left home an’
gone to stay down yonder in de Bottoms with them triflin’
Smothers family, where de piano’s goin’ night an’ day. An’
yo’ mammy’s done gone a-trapesin’ after Jimboy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, I
thanks de Lawd you ain’t gone too. You’s mighty little an’
knee-high to a duck, but you’s ma stand-by. You’s all I got,
an’ you ain’t gwine leave yo’ old grandma, is you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager had turned to Sandy in these lonely days for comfort
and companionship. Through the long summer
evenings they sat together on the front porch and she told
her grandchild stories. Sometimes Sister Johnson came
over and sat with them for a while smoking. Sometimes
Madam de Carter, full of chatter and big words about the
lodge and the race, would be there. But more often the two
were alone—the black washwoman with the grey hair and
the little brown boy. Slavery-time stories, myths, folk-tales
like the Rabbit and the Tar Baby; the war, Abe Lincoln,
freedom; visions of the Lord; years of faith and labor, love
and struggle filled Aunt Hager’s talk of a summer night,
while the lightning-bugs glowed and glimmered and the
katydids chirruped, and the stars sparkled in the far-off
heavens.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy was getting to be too big a boy to sit in his grandmother’s
lap and be rocked to sleep as in summers gone by;
now he sat on a little stool beside her, leaning his head on
her legs when he was tired. Or else he lay flat on the floor of
the porch listening, and looking up at the stars. Tonight
Hager talked about love.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>“These young ones what’s comin’ up now, they calls us
ole fogies, an’ handkerchief heads, an’ white folks’ niggers
’cause we don’t get mad an’ rar’ up in arms like they does
’cause things is kinder hard, but, honey, when you gets old,
you knows they ain’t no sense in gettin’ mad an’ sourin’ yo’
soul with hatin’ peoples. White folks is white folks, an’ colored
folks is colored, an’ neither one of ’em is bad as t’other
make out. For mighty nigh seventy years I been knowin’
both of ’em, an’ I ain’t never had no room in ma heart to
hate neither white nor colored. When you starts hatin’ people,
you gets uglier than they is—an’ I ain’t never had no
time for ugliness, ’cause that’s where de devil comes in—in
ugliness!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They talks ’bout slavery time an’ they makes out now
like it were de most awfullest time what ever was, but don’t
you believe it, chile, ’cause it weren’t all that bad. Some o’ de
white folks was just as nice to their niggers as they could be,
nicer than many of’em is now, what makes ’em work for less
than they needs to eat. An’ in those days they had to feed
’em. An’ they ain’t every white man beat his slaves neither!
Course I ain’t sayin’ ’twas no paradise, but I ain’t going to
say it were no hell either. An’ maybe I’s kinder seein’ it on de
bestest side ’cause I worked in de big house an’ ain’t never
went to de fields like most o’ de niggers did. Ma mammy
were de big-house cook an’ I grewed up right with her in de
kitchen an’ played with little Miss Jeanne. An’ Miss Jeanne
taught me to read what little I knowed. An’ when she
growed up an’ I growed up, she kept me with her like her
friend all de time. I loved her an’ she loved me. Miss Jeanne
were de mistress’ daughter, but warn’t no difference ’tween
us ’ceptin’ she called me Hager an’ I called her Miss Jeanne.
But what difference do one word like Miss’ make in yo’
heart? None, chile, none. De words don’t make no difference
if de love’s there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I disremembers what year it were de war broke out, but
white folks was scared, an’ niggers, too. Didn’t know what
might happen. An’ we heard talk o’ Abraham Lincoln ’way
down yonder in de South. An’ de ole marster, ole man Winfield,
took his gun an’ went to war, an’ de young son, too, an’
de superintender and de overseer—all of ’em gone to follow
Lee. Ain’t left nothin’ but womens an’ niggers on de plantation.
De womens was a-cryin’ an’ de niggers was, too, ’cause
they was sorry for de po’ grievin’ white folks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is I ever told you how Miss Jeanne an’ Marster Robert
was married in de springtime o’ de war, with de magnolias
all a-bloomin’ like candles for they weddin’? Is I ever told
you, Sandy? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, I must some time. An’ then Marster
Robert had to go right off with his mens, ’cause he’s a high
officer in de army an’ they heard Sherman were comin’. An’
he left her a-standin’ with her weddin’-clothes on, leanin’
’gainst a pillar o’ de big white porch, with nobody but me to
dry her eyes—ole Missis done dead an’ de men-folks all
gone to war. An’ nobody in that big whole mansion but
black ole deaf Aunt Granny Jones, what kept de house
straight, an’ me, what was stayin’ with ma mistress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, de white folks needed niggers then mo’n they ever
did befo’, an’ they ain’t a colored person what didn’t stick by
’em when all they men-folks were gone an’ de white womens
was a-cryin’ an’ a-faintin’ like they did in them days.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But lemme tell you ’bout Miss Jeanne. She just set in her
room an’ cry. A-holdin’ Marster Bob’s pitcher, she set an’
cry, an’ she ain’t come out o’ her room to see ’bout
nothin’—house, horses, cotton—nothin’. But de niggers,
they ain’t cheat her nor steal from her. An’ come de news
dat her brother done got wounded an’ died in Virginia, an’
her cousins got de yaller fever. Then come de news that
Marster Robert, Miss Jeanne’s husband, ain’t no mo’! Killed
in de battle! An’ I thought Miss Jeanne would like to go
crazy. De news say he died like a soldier, brave an’ fightin’.
But when she heard it, she went to de drawer an’ got out her
weddin’-veil an’ took her flowers in her hands like she were
goin’ to de altar to meet de groom. Then she just sink in de
flo’ an’ cry till I pick her up an’ hold her like a chile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, de freedom come, an’ all de niggers scatter like
buck-shot, goin’ to live in town. An’ de yard niggers say I’s a
ole fool! I’s free now—why don’t I come with them? But I
say no, I’s gwine stay with Miss Jeanne—an’ I stayed. I
’lowed ain’t nary one o’ them colored folks needed me like
Miss Jeanne did, so I ain’t went with ’em.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An’ de time pass; it pass an’ it pass, an’ de ole house get
rusty for lack o’ paint, an’ de things, they ’gin to fall to
pieces. An’ Miss Jeanne say: ‘Hager, I ain’t got nobody in de
world but you.’ An’ I say: ‘Miss Jeanne, I ain’t got nobody in
de world but you neither.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And then she’d start talkin’ ’bout her young husband
what died so handsome an’ brave, what ain’t even had time
that last day fo’ to ’scort her to de church for de weddin’,
nor to hold her in his arms ’fore de orders come to leave.
An’ we would set on de big high ole porch, with its tall
stone pillars, in de evenin’s twilight till de bats start flyin’
overhead an’ de sunset glow done gone, she in her wide
white skirts a-billowin’ round her slender waist, an’ me in
ma apron an’ cap an’ this here chain she gimme you see on
ma neck all de time an’ what’s done wore so thin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They was a ole stump of a blasted tree in de yard front o’
de porch ’bout tall as a man, with two black pieces o’
branches raised up like arms in de air. We used to set an’
look at it, an’ Miss Jeanne could see it from her bedroom
winder upstairs, an’ sometimes this stump, it look like it
were movin’ right up de path like a man.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“After she done gone to bed, late one springtime night
when de moon were shinin’, I hear Miss Jeanne a-cryin’:
‘He’s come! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Hager, ma Robert’s come back to me!’ An’ I
jumped out o’ ma bed in de next room where I were sleepin’
an’ run in to her, an’ there she was in her long, white night-clothes
standin’ out in de moonlight on de little balcony,
high up in de middle o’ that big stone porch. She was
lookin’ down into de yard at this stump of a tree a-holdin’
up its arms. An’ she thinks it’s Marster Robert a-callin’ her.
She thinks he’s standin’ there in his uniform, come back
from de war, a-callin’ her. An’ she say: ‘I’m comin’, Bob,
dear;’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ ’fore I think what she’s doin’, Miss Jeanne
done stepped over de little rail o’ de balcony like she were
walkin’ on moonlight. An’ she say: ‘I’m comin’, Bob!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She ain’t left no will, so de house an’ all went to de State,
an’ I been left with nothin’. But I ain’t care ’bout that. I followed
her to de grave, an’ I been with her all de time, ’cause
she’s ma friend. An’ I were sorry for her, ’cause I knowed
that love were painin’ her soul, an’ warn’t nobody left to
help her but me.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An’ since then I’s met many a white lady an’ many a
white gentleman, an’ some of ’em’s been kind to me an’
some of ’em ain’t; some of ’em’s cussed me an’ wouldn’t pay
me fo’ ma work; an’ some of ’em’s hurted me awful. But I’s
been sorry fo’ white folks, fo’ I knows something inside
must be aggravatin’ de po’ souls. An’ I’s kept a room in ma
heart fo’ ’em, ’cause white folks needs us, honey, even if they
don’t know it. They’s like spoilt chillens what’s got too
much o’ ever’thing—an’ they needs us niggers, what ain’t
got nothin’.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’s been livin’ a long time in yesterday, Sandy chile, an’ I
knows there ain’t no room in de world fo’ nothin’ mo’n love.
I knows, chile! Ever’thing there is but lovin’ leaves a rust on
yo’ soul. An’ to love sho ’nough, you got to have a spot in yo’
heart fo’ ever’body—great an’ small, white an’ black, an’
them what’s good an’ them what’s evil—’cause love ain’t got
no crowded-out places where de good ones stays an’ de bad
ones can’t come in. When it gets that way, then it ain’t love.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“White peoples maybe mistreats you an’ hates you, but
when you hates ’em back, you’s de one what’s hurted, ’cause
hate makes yo’ heart ugly—that’s all it does. It closes up de
sweet door to life an’ makes ever’thing small an’ mean an’
dirty. Honey, there ain’t no room in de world fo’ hate, white
folks hatin’ niggers, an’ niggers hatin’ white folks. There
ain’t no room in this world fo’ nothin’ but love, Sandy chile.
That’s all they’s room fo’—nothin’ but love.”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap17'>CHAPTER XVII</h1></div>

<h3>Barber-Shop</h3>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Logan, hearing that Aunt Hager had an empty room
since all her daughters were gone, sent her one evening a
new-comer in town looking for a place to stay. His name
was Wim Dogberry and he was a brickmason and hod-carrier,
a tall, quiet, stoop-shouldered black man, neither old
nor young. He took, for two dollars and a half a week, the
room that had been Annjee’s, and Hager gave him a key to
the front door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wim Dogberry was carrying hod then on a new moving-picture
theatre that was being built. He rose early and came
in late, face, hands, and overalls covered with mortar dust.
He washed in a tin basin by the pump and went to bed, and
about all he ever said to Aunt Hager and Sandy was “Good-mornin’ ”
and “Good-evenin’,” and maybe a stumbling
“How is you?” But on Sunday mornings Hager usually
asked him to breakfast if he got up on time—for on Saturday
nights Wim drank licker and came home mumbling to
himself a little later than on week-day evenings, so sometimes
he would sleep until noon Sundays.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One Saturday night he wet the bed, and when Hager
went to make it up on the Sabbath morning, she found a
damp yellow spot in the middle. Of this act Dogberry was
so ashamed that he did not even say “Good-mornin’ ” for
several days, and if, from the corner, he saw Aunt Hager and
her grandson sitting on the porch in the twilight when he
came towards home, he would pass his street and walk until
he thought they had gone inside to bed. But he was a quiet
roomer, he didn’t give anyone any trouble, and he paid regularly.
And since Hager was in no position to despise two
dollars and a half every week, she rather liked Dogberry.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>Now Hager kept the growing Sandy close by her all the
time to help her while she washed and ironed and to talk to
her while she sat on the porch in the evenings. Of course, he
played sometimes in his own yard whenever Willie-Mae or
Buster or, on Sundays, Jimmy Lane came to the house. But
Jimmy Lane was running wild since his mother died, and
Hager didn’t like him to visit her grandson any more. He
was bad.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Sandy wanted to go to the vacant lot to play baseball
with the neighbor boys, his grandmother would usually
not allow him to leave her. “Stay here, sir, with Hager. I
needs you to pump ma water fo’ me an’ fill up these tubs,”
she would say. Or else she would yell: “Ain’t I told you you
might get hurt down there with them old rough white boys?
Stay here in yo’ own yard, where you can keep out o’ mischief.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So he grew accustomed to remaining near his grandmother,
and at night, when the other children would be
playing duck-on-the-rock under the arc-light at the corner,
he would be sitting on the front porch listening to Aunt
Hager telling her tales of slavery and talking of her own far-off
youth. When school opened in the fall, the old woman
said: “I don’t know what I’s gwine do all day without you,
Sandy. You sho been company to me, with all my own chillens
gone.” But Sandy was glad to get back to a roomful of
boys and girls again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One Indian-summer afternoon when Aunt Hager was
hanging up clothes in the back yard while the boy held the
basket of clothes-pins, old man Logan drove past on his
rickety trash-wagon and bowed elaborately to Hager. She
went to the back fence to joke and gossip with him as usual,
while his white mule switched off persistent flies with her
tail.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Before the old beau drove away, he said: “Say, Hager, does
you want that there young one o’ your’n to work? I knows a
little job he can have if you does,” pointing to Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’ll he got to do?” demanded Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Pete Scott say he need a boy down yonder at de
barber-shop on Saturdays to kinder clean up where de kinks
fall, an’ shine shoes fo’ de customers. Ain’t nothin’ hard
’bout it, an’ I was thinkin’ it would just ’bout be Sandy’s size.
He could make a few pennies ever’ week to kinder help
things ’long.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“True, he sho could,” said Hager. “I’ll have him go see
Pete.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So Sandy went to see Mr. Peter Scott at the colored barber-shop
on Pearl Street that evening and was given his first
regular job. Every Saturday, which was the barber-shop’s
only busy day, when the working-men got paid off, Sandy
went on the job at noon and worked until eight or nine in
the evening. His duties were to keep the place swept clean
of the hair that the three barbers sheared and to shine the
shoes of any customer who might ask for a shine. Only a few
customers permitted themselves that last luxury, for many
of them came to the shop in their working-shoes, covered
with mud or lime, and most of them shined their own boots
at home on Sunday mornings before church. But occasionally
Cudge Windsor, who owned a pool hall, or some of the
dressed-up bootleggers, might climb on the stand and permit
their shoes to be cleaned by the brown youngster, who
asked shyly: “Shine, mister?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The barber-shop was a new world to Sandy, who had
lived thus far tied to Aunt Hager’s apron-strings. He was a
dreamy-eyed boy who had grown to his present age largely
under the dominant influence of women—Annjee, Harriett,
his grandmother—because Jimboy had been so seldom
home. But the barber-shop then was a man’s world, and, on
Saturdays, while a dozen or more big laborers awaited their
turns, the place was filled with loud man-talk and smoke
and laughter. Baseball, Jack Johnson, racehorses, white
folks, Teddy Roosevelt, local gossip, Booker Washington,
women, labor prospects in Topeka, Kansas City, Omaha,
religion, politics, women, God—discussions and arguments
all afternoon and far up into the night, while crisp kinks
rolled to the floor, cigarette- and cigar-butts were thrown
on the hearth of the monkey-stove, and Sandy called out:
“Shine, mister?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sometimes the boy earned one or two dollars from
shines, but on damp or snowy days he might not make anything
except the fifty cents Pete Scott paid him for sweeping
up. Or perhaps one of the barbers, too busy to go out
for supper, would send Sandy for a sandwich and a bottle of
milk, and thus he would make an extra nickel or dime.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The patrons liked him and often kidded him about his
sandy hair. “Boy, you’s too dark to have hair like that. Ain’t
nobody but white folks s’posed to have sandy-colored hair.
An’ your’n’s nappy at that!” Then Sandy would blush with
embarrassment—if the change from a dry chocolate to a
damp chocolate can be called a blush, as he grew warm and
perspired—because he didn’t like to be kidded about his
hair. And he hadn’t been around uncouth fellows long
enough to learn the protective art of turning back a joke.
He had discovered already, though, that so-called jokes are
often not really jokes at all, but rather unpleasant realities
that hurt unless you can think of something equally funny
and unpleasant to say in return. But the men who patronized
Pete Scott’s barber-shop seldom grew angry at the hard
pleasantries that passed for humor, and they could play the
dozens for hours without anger, unless the parties concerned
became serious, when they were invited to take it on
the outside. And even at that a fight was fun, too.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After a winter of Saturday nights at Pete’s shop Sandy
himself became pretty adept at “kidding”; but at first he was
timid about it and afraid to joke with grown-up people, or
to give smart answers to strangers when they teased him
about his crinkly, sand-colored head. One day, however, one
of the barbers gave him a tin of Madam Walker’s and told
him: “Lay that hair down an’ stop these niggers from
laughin’ at you.” Sandy took his advice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Madam Walker’s—a thick yellow pomade—and a good
wetting with water proved most efficacious to the boy’s hair,
when aided with a stocking cap—the top of a woman’s
stocking cut off and tied in a knot at one end so as to fit
tightly over one’s head, pressing the hair smooth. Thereafter
Sandy appeared with his hair slick and shiny. And the
salve and water together made it seem a dark brown, just the
color of his skin, instead of the peculiar sandy tint it possessed
in its natural state. Besides, he soon advanced far
enough in the art of “kidding” to say: “So’s your pa’s,” to
people who informed him that his head was nappy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>During the autumn Harriett had been home once to see
her mother and had said that she was working as chambermaid
with Maudel at the hotel. But in the barber-shop that
winter Sandy often heard his aunt’s name mentioned in less
proper connections. Sometimes the boy pretended not to
hear, and if Pete Scott was there, he always stopped the men
from talking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tired o’ all this nasty talk ’bout women in ma shop,” he
said one Saturday night. “Some o’ you men better look after
your own women-folks if you got any.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, all de womens in de world ain’t worth two cents to
me,” said a waiter sitting in the middle chair, his face covered
with lather. “I don’t respect no woman but my
mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An’ neither do I,” answered Greensbury Jones. “All of
’em’s evil, specially if they’s black an’ got blue gums.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’s done told you to hush,” said Pete Scott behind the
first chair, where he was clipping Jap Logan’s hair. “Ma
wife’s black herself, so don’t start talkin’ ’bout no blue
gums! I’s tired o’ this here female talk anyhow. This is ma
shop, an’ ma razors sho can cut somethin’ else ’sides hair—so
now just keep on talkin’ ’bout blue gums!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I see where Bryant’s runnin’ for president agin,” said
Greensbury Jones.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But one Saturday, while the proprietor was out to snatch
a bite to eat, a discussion came up as to who was the prettiest
colored girl in town. Was she yellow, high-brown,
chocolate, or black? Of course, there was no agreement, but
names were mentioned and qualities were described. One
girl had eyes like Eve herself; another had hips like Miss
Cleopatra; one smooth brown-skin had legs like—like—like—</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, man! De Statue of Liberty!” somebody suggested
when the name of a famous beauty failed the speaker’s
memory.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But, feller, there ain’t nothin’ in all them rainbow
shades,” a young teamster argued against Uncle Dan
Givens, who preferred high yellows. “Gimme a cool black
gal ever’ time! They’s too dark to fade—and when they are
good-looking, I mean they <span class='it'>are</span> good-looking! I’m talkin’
’bout Harrietta Williams, too! That’s who I mean! Now,
find a better-looking gal than she is!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I admits Harrietta’s all right,” said the old man; “all right
to look at but—sput-t-tsss!” He spat contemptuously at the
stove.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, I know that!” said the teamster; “but I ain’t talkin’
’bout what she is! I’m talkin’ ’bout how she looks. An’ a
songster out o’ this world don’t care if she is a—!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“S-s-s-sh! Soft-pedal it brother.” One of the men nudged
the speaker. “There’s one o’ the Williamses right here—that
kid over yonder shinin’ shoes’s Harriett’s nephew or
somethin’ ’nother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You niggers talks too free, anyhow,” one of the barbers
added. “Somebody gwine cut your lips off some o’ these
days. De idee o’ ole Uncle Dan Givens’ arguin’ ’bout
women and he done got whiskers all round his head like a
wore-out cheese.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s all right, you young whip-snapper,” squeaked
Uncle Dan heatedly. “Might have whiskers round ma head,
but I ain’t wore out!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Laughter and smoke filled the little shop, while the winter
wind blew sleet against the big plate-glass window and
whistled through the cracks in the doorway, making the gas
lights flicker overhead. Sandy smacked his polishing cloth
on the toes of a gleaming pair of brown button shoes belonging
to a stranger in town, then looked up with a grin
and said: “Yes, sir!” as the man handed him a quarter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Keep the change,” said the new-comer grandly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That guy’s an actor,” one of the barbers said when the
man went out. “He’s playin’ with the <span class='it'>Smart Set</span> at the Opery
House tonight. I bet the top gallery’ll be full o’ niggers
sence it’s a jig show, but I ain’t goin’ anear there myself to be
Jim-Crowed, ’cause I don’t believe in goin’ nowhere I ain’t
allowed to set with the rest of the folks. If I can’t be the
table-cloth, I won’t be the dish-rag—that’s my motto. And if
I can’t buy the seats I want at a show, I sure God can keep
my change!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, and miss all the good shows,” countered a little red-eyed
porter. “Just as well say if you can’t eat in a restaurant
where white folks eat, you ain’t gonna eat.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Anybody want a shine?” yelled Sandy above the racket.
“And if you don’t want a shine, stay out of my chair and do
your arguing on the floor!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A brown-skin chorus girl, on her way to the theatre,
stepped into the shop and asked if she could buy a <span class='it'>Chicago
Defender</span> there. The barber directed her to the colored
restaurant, while all the men immediately stopped talking
to stare at her until she went out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whew! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Some legs!” the teamster cried as the door
closed on a vision of silk stockings. “How’d you like to shine
that long, sweet brown-skin mama’s shoes, boy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She wouldn’t have to pay me!” said Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whoopee! Gallery or no gallery,” shouted Jap Logan,
“I’m gonna see that show! Don’t care if they do Jim-Crow
niggers in the white folks’ Opery House!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes,” muttered one of the barbers, “that’s just what’s the
matter now—you ain’t got no race-pride! You niggers ain’t
got no shame!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap18'>CHAPTER XVIII</h1></div>

<h3>Children’s Day</h3>

<p class='pindent'>When Easter came that spring, Sandy had saved enough
money to buy himself a suit and a new cap from his earnings
at the barber-shop. He was very proud of this accomplishment
and so was Aunt Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’s a ’dustrious chile, sho is! Gwine make a smart man
even if yo’ daddy warn’t nothin’. Gwine get ahead an’ do
good fo’ yo’self an’ de race, yes, sir!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The spring came early and the clear balmy days found
Hager’s back yard billowing with clean white clothes on
lines in the sun. Her roomer had left her when the theatre
was built and had gone to work on a dam somewhere up the
river, so Annjee’s room was empty again. Sandy had slept
with his grandmother during the cold weather, but in summer
he slept on a pallet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The boy did not miss his mother. When she had been
home, Annjee had worked out all day, and she was quiet at
night because she was always tired. Harriett had been the
one to keep the fun and laughter going—Harriett and Jimboy,
whenever he was in town. Sandy wished Harrie would
live at home instead of staying at Maudel’s house, but he
never said anything about it to his grandmother. He went to
school regularly, went to work at the barber-shop on Saturdays
and to Sunday School on Sundays, and remained with
Aunt Hager the rest of his time. She was always worried if
she didn’t know where he was.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Colored boys, when they gets round twelve an’ thirteen,
they gets so bad, Sandy,” she would say. “I wants you to stay
nice an’ make something out o’ yo’self. If Hager lives, she
ain’t gonna see you go down. She’s gonna make a fine man
out o’ you fo’ de glory o’ God an’ de black race. You gwine
to ’mount to something in this world. You hear me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy did hear her, and he knew what she meant. She
meant a man like Booker T. Washington, or Frederick Douglass,
or like Paul Lawrence Dunbar, who did poetry-writing.
Or maybe Jack Johnson. But Hager said Jack Johnson
was the devil’s kind of greatness, not God’s.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s what you get from workin’ round that old barber-shop
where all they talks ’bout is prize-fightin’ an’ hoss-racin’.
Jack Johnson done married a white woman, anyhow!
What he care ’bout de race?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little boy wondered if Jack Johnson’s kids looked like
Buster. But maybe he didn’t have any kids. He must ask Pete
Scott about that when he went back to work on Saturday.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the summer a new amusement park opened in Stanton,
the first of its kind in the city, with a merry-go-round, a
shoot-the-shoots, a Ferris wheel, a dance-hall, and a bandstand
for week-end concerts. In order to help popularize
the park, which was far on the north edge of town, the <span class='it'>Daily
Leader</span> announced, under its auspices, what was called a
Free Children’s Day Party open to all the readers of that paper
who clipped the coupons published in each issue. On
July 26 these coupons, presented at the gate, would entitle
every child in Stanton to free admittance to the park, free
pop-corn, free lemonade, and one ride on each of the
amusement attractions—the merry-go-round, the shoot-the-shoots,
and the Ferris wheel. All you had to do was to be
a reader of the <span class='it'>Daily Leader</span> and present the coupons cut
from that paper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager and Sister Johnson both took the <span class='it'>Leader</span> regularly,
as did almost everybody else in Stanton, so Sandy
and Willie-Mae started to clip coupons. All the children in
the neighborhood were doing the same thing. The Children’s
Day would be a big event for all the little people in
town. None of them had ever seen a shoot-the-shoots before,
a contrivance that pulled little cars full of folks high
into the air and then let them come whizzing down an incline
into an artificial pond, where the cars would float like
boats. Sandy and Willie-Mae looked forward to thrill after
thrill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the afternoon of the great day came at last, Willie-Mae
stopped for Sandy, dressed in her whitest white dress
and her new patent-leather shoes, which hurt her feet awfully.
Sandy’s grandmother was making him wash his ears
when she came in.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You gwine out yonder ’mongst all them white chillens, I
wants you to at least look clean!” said Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They started out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here!” called Aunt Hager. “Ain’t you gwine to take yo’
coupons?” In his rush to get away, Sandy had forgotten
them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a long walk to the park, and Willie-Mae stopped
and took off her shoes and stockings and carried them in
her hands until she got near the gate; then she put them on
again and limped bravely along, clutching her precious bits
of newspaper. They could hear the band playing and children
shouting and squealing as the cars on the shoot-the-shoots
shot downward with a splash into the pond. They
could see the giant Ferris wheel, larger than the one the
carnival had had, circling high in the air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m gonna ride on that first,” said Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were crowds of children under the bright red and
white wooden shelter at the park entrance. They were lining
up at the gate—laughing, merry, clean little white children,
pushing and yelling and giggling amiably. Sandy let
Willie-Mae go first and he got in line behind her. The band
was playing gaily inside.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. They were almost to the entrance
now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. There were just two boys in front of
them .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Willie-Mae held out her black little hand clutching
the coupons. They moved forward. The man looked
down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sorry,” he said. “This party’s for white kids.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Willie-Mae did not understand. She stood holding out
the coupons, waiting for the tall white man to take them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stand back, you two,” he said, looking at Sandy as well.
“I told you little darkies this wasn’t your party.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Come
on—next little girl.” And the line of white children pushed
past Willie-Mae and Sandy, going into the park. Stunned,
the two dark ones drew aside. Then they noticed a group of
a dozen or more other colored youngsters standing apart in
the sun, just without the bright entrance pavilion, and
among them was Sadie Butler, Sandy’s class-mate. Three or
four of the colored children were crying, but most of them
looked sullen and angry, and some of them had turned to go
home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My papa takes the <span class='it'>Leader</span>,” Sadie Butler was saying. “And
you see what it says here on the coupons, too—‘Free Admittance
to Every Child in Stanton.’ Can’t you read it, Sandy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure, I can read it, but I guess they didn’t mean colored,”
he answered, as the boy watched the white children
going in the gate. “They wouldn’t let us in.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Willie-Mae, between the painful shoes and the hurt of
her disappointment, was on the verge of tears. One of the
small boys in the crowd, a hard-looking little fellow from
Pearl Street, was cursing childishly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“God damn old sons of biscuit-eaters, that what they are!
I wish I was a big man, dog-gone, I’d shoot ’em all, that’s
what I’d do!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose they didn’t mean colored kids,” said Sandy
again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Buster went in all right,” said Sadie. “I seen him. But
they didn’t know he was colored, I guess. When I went up to
the gate, the man said: ‘Whoa! Where you goin’?’ just like I
was a horse.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m going home now and tell my papa.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She walked away, followed by five or six other little girls
in their Sunday dresses. Willie-Mae was sitting on the
ground taking off her shoes again, sweat and tears running
down her black cheeks. Sandy saw his white schoolmate,
Earl, approaching.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s matter, Sandy? Ain’t you goin’ in?” Earl demanded,
looking at his friend’s worried face. “Did the little
girl hurt her foot?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” said Sandy. “We just ain’t going in.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Here, Earl,
you can have my coupons. If you have extra ones, the papers
says you get more lemonade .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so you take ’em.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The white boy, puzzled, accepted the proffered coupons,
stood dumbly for a moment wondering what to say to his
brown friend, then went on into the park.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s yo’ party, white chile!” a little tan-skin girl called after
him, mimicking the way the man at the gate had talked.
“Whoa! Stay out! You’s a nigger!” she said to Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The other children, in spite of themselves, laughed at the
accuracy of her burlesque imitation. Then, with the music
of the merry-go-round from beyond the high fence and the
laughter of happy children following them, the group of
dark-skinned ones started down the dusty road together—and
to all the colored boys and girls they met on the way
they called out, “Ain’t no use, jigaboos! That party’s for
white folks!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Willie-Mae and Sandy got home and told their
story, Sister Johnson was angry as a wet hen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Crackers is devils,” she cried. “I ’spected as much! Dey
ain’t nary hell hot ’nough to burn ole white folks, ’cause
dey’s devils dey-selves! De dirty hounds!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But all Hager said was: “They’s po’ trash owns that park
what don’t know no better, hurtin’ chillens’ feelin’s, but
we’ll forgive ’em! Don’t fret yo’self, Sister Johnson. What
good can frettin’ do? Come on here, let’s we have a party of
our own.” She went out in the yard and took a watermelon
from a tub of well-water where it had been cooling and cut
it into four juicy slices; then they sat down on the grass at
the shady side of the house and ate, trying to forget about
white folks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t you mind, Willie-Mae,” Hager said to the little
black girl, who was still crying. “You’s colored, honey, an’
you’s liable to have a hard time in this life—but don’t
cry.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You, Sandy, run round de house an’ see didn’t I
heard de mail-man blowin’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m,” said Sandy when he came back. “Was the mail-man,
and I got a letter from mama.” The boy sat on the
grass to read it, anxious to see what Annjee said. And later,
when the company had gone, he read it aloud to Hager.</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'><span class='sc'>Dear Little Son</span>:</p>

<p class='pindent'>How have you all been? how is grandma? I get worried
about you when I do not hear. You know Aunt Hager is old
and can’t write much so you must do it for her because she is
not used to adress letters and the last one was two weeks
getting here and had went all around everywhere. Your father
says tell you hello. I got a job in a boarding house for
old white folks what are cranky about how they beds is
made. There are white and colored here in the auto business
and women to. Tell Madam de Carter I will send my Lodge
dues back because I do not want to be transfer as I might
come home sometime. I ain’t seen you all now for more’n a
year. Jimboy he keeps changing jobs from one thing to another
but he likes this town pretty well. You know he broke
his guitar carrying it in a crowded street-car. Ma says you are
growing and have bought yourself a new suit last Easter.
Mama certainly does right well to keep on washing and
ironing at her age and worrying with you besides. Tempy
ought to help ma but seem like she don’t think so. Do you
ever see your Aunt Harrie? I hope she is settling down in
her ways. If ma wasn’t all by herself maybe I could send for
you to come live with us in Detroit but maybe I will be
home to see you if I ever get any money ahead. Rent is so
high here I never wittnessed so many folks in one house,
rooming five and six together, and nobody can save a dime.
Are you still working at the barber-shop. I heard Sister
Johnson was under the weather but I couldn’t make out
from ma’s scribbling what was the matter with her. Did she
have a physicianer? You behave yourself with Willie-Mae
because you are getting to be a big boy now and she is a girl
older then you are. I am going to send you some pants next
time I go down town but I get off from work so late I don’t
have a chance to do nothing and your father eats in the
restaurant count of me not home to fix for him and I don’t
care where you go colored folks has a hard time. I want you
to mind your grandma and help her work. She is too old to
be straining at the pump drawing water to wash clothes
with. Now write to me. Love to you all both and seven kisses
XXXXXXX right here on the paper,</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'>Your loving mother,</p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'><span class='sc'>Annjelica Rodgers</span></p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy laughed at the clumsy cross-mark kisses. He was
glad to get a letter from his mother, and word in it about
Jimboy. And he was sorry his father had broken his guitar.
But not even watermelon and the long letter could drive
away his sick feeling about the park.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I guess Kansas is getting like the South, isn’t it, ma?”
Sandy said to his grandmother as they came out on the
porch that evening after supper. “They don’t like us here either,
do they?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Aunt Hager gave him no answer. In silence they
watched the sunset fade from the sky. Slowly the evening
star grew bright, and, looking at the stars, Hager began to
sing, very softly at first:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>From this world o’ trouble free,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Stars beyond!</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Stars beyond!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>And Sandy, as he stood beside his grandmother on the
porch, heard a great chorus out of the black past—singing
generations of toil-worn Negroes, echoing Hager’s voice as
it deepened and grew in volume:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>There’s a star fo’ you an’ me,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Stars beyond!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<div><h1 id='chap19'>CHAPTER XIX</h1></div>

<h3>Ten Dollars and Costs</h3>

<p class='pindent'>In the fall Sandy found a job that occupied him after school
hours, as well as on Saturday and Sunday. One afternoon at
the barber-shop, Charlie Nutter, a bell-hop who had come
to have his hair cut, asked Sandy to step outside a minute.
Once out of earshot of the barbers and loafers within,
Charlie went on: “Say, kid, I got some dope to buzz to yuh
’bout a job. Joe Willis, the white guy what keeps the hotel
where I work, is lookin’ for a boy to kinder sweep up around
the lobby every day, dust off, and sort o’ help the bell-boys
out sometimes. Ain’t nothin’ hard attached to it, and yuh
can bring ’long your shine-box and rub up shoes in the
lobby, too, if yuh wants to. I though’ maybe yuh might like
to have the job. Yuh’d make more’n yuh do here. And
more’n that, too, when yuh got on to the ropes. Course
yuh’d have to fix me up with a couple o’ bucks o’ so for gettin’
yuh the job, but if yuh want it, just lemme know and I’ll
fix it with the boss. He tole me to start lookin’ for somebody
and that’s what I’m doin’.” Charlie Nutter went on talking,
without stopping to wait for an answer. “Course a boy like
you don’t know nothin’ ’bout hotel work, but yuh ain’t
never too young to learn, and that’s a nice easy way to start.
Yuh might work up to me some time, yuh never can tell—head
bell-hop! ’Cause I ain’t gonna stay in this burg all my
life; I figger if I can hop bells here, I can hop bells in
Chicago or some place worth livin’ at. But the tips ain’t bad
down there at the Drummer’s though—lots o’ sportin’
women and folks like that what don’t mind givin’ yuh a
quarter any time.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And yuh can get well yourself once in
a while. What yuh say? Do yuh want it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy thought quick. With Christmas not far off, his
shoes about worn out, and the desire to help Aunt Hager,
too—“I guess I better take it,” he said. “But do I have to pay
you now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hell, naw, not now! I’ll keep my eye on yuh, and yuh can
just slip me a little change now and then down to the hotel
when you start workin’. Other boy ain’t quittin’ nohow till
next week. S’pose yuh come round there Sunday morning
and I’ll kinder show yuh what to do. And don’t pay no mind
to Willis when he hollers at yuh. He’s all right—just got a
hard way about him with the help, that’s all—but he ain’t a
bad boss. I’ll see yuh, then! Drop by Sunday and lemme
know for sure. So long!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Aunt Hager was not much pleased when Sandy came
home that night and she heard the news. “I ain’t never
wanted none o’ my chillens to work in no ole hotels,” she
said. “They’s evil, full o’ nastiness, an’ you don’t learn
nothin’ good in ’em. I don’t want you to go there, chile.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But grandma,” Sandy argued, “I want to send mama a
Christmas present. And just look at my shoes, all worn out!
I don’t make much money any more since that new colored
barber-shop opened up. It’s all white inside and folks don’t
have to wait so long ’cause there’s five barbers. Jimmy
Lane’s got the porter’s job down there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I have to
start working regular some time, don’t I?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I reckons you does, but I hates to see you workin’ in hotels,
chile, with all them low-down Bottoms niggers, and
bad womens comin’ an’ goin’. But I reckon you does need
de job. Yo’ mammy ain’t sent no money here fo’ de Lawd
knows when, an’ I ain’t able to buy you nice clothes an’ all
like you needs to go to school in.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But don’t forget,
honey, no matter where you works—you be good an’ do
right.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I reckon you’ll get along.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So Sandy found Charlie Nutter on Sunday and told him
for sure he would take the job. Then he told Pete Scott he
was no longer coming to work at his barber-shop, and Pete
got mad and told him to go to hell, quitting when business
was bad after all he had done for Sandy, besides letting him
shine shoes and keep all his earnings. At other shops he
couldn’t have done that; besides he had intended to teach
Sandy to be a barber when he got big enough.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But go on!” said Pete Scott. “Go on! I don’t need you.
Plenty other boys I can find to work for me. But I bet you
won’t stay at that Drummer’s Hotel no time, though—I can
tell you that!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The long Indian summer lingered until almost Thanksgiving,
and the weather was sunny and warm. The day before
Sandy went to work on his new job, he came home
from school, brought in the wood for the stove, and delivered
a basket of newly ironed clothes to the white folks.
When he returned, he found his grandmother standing on
the front porch in the sunset, reading the evening paper,
which the boy had recently delivered. Sandy stopped in the
twilight beside Hager, breathing in the crisp cool air and
wondering what they were going to have for supper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly his grandmother gave a deep cry and leaned
heavily against the door-jamb, letting the paper fall from
her hands. “O, ma Lawd!” she moaned. “O, ma Lawd!” and
an expression of the uttermost pain made the old woman’s
eyes widen in horror. “Is I read de name right?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy, frightened, picked up the paper from the porch
and found on the front page the little four-line item that his
grandmother had just read:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='line' style='text-align:center;'>NEGRESSES ARRESTED</p>

<p class='noindent'>Harrietta Williams and Maudel Smothers, two young negresses,
were arrested last night on Pearl Street for street-walking.
They were brought before Judge Brinton and fined
ten dollars and costs.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>“What does that mean, grandma—street-walking?” the
child asked, but his grandmother raised her apron to her
eyes and stumbled into the house. Sandy stopped, perplexed
at the meaning of the article, at his aunt’s arrest, at his
grandmother’s horror. Then he followed Hager, the open
newspaper still in his hands, and found her standing at the
window in the kitchen, crying. Racking sobs were shaking
her body and the boy, who had never seen an old person
weep like that before, was terribly afraid. He didn’t know
that grown-up people cried, except at funerals, where it was
the proper thing to do. He didn’t know they ever cried
alone, by themselves in their own houses.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m gonna get Sister Johnson,” he said, dropping the paper
on the floor. “I’m gonna get Sister Johnson quick!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, honey, don’t get her,” stammered the old woman.
“She can’t help us none, chile. Can’t nobody help us .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but
de Lawd.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the dusk Sandy saw that his grandmother was trying
hard to make her lips speak plainly and to control her sobs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s we pray, son, fo’ yo’ po’ lost Aunt Harriett—fo’ ma
own baby chile, what’s done turned from de light an’ is
walkin’ in darkness.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She dropped on her knees near the kitchen-stove with
her arms on the seat of a chair and her head bowed. Sandy
got on his knees, too, and while his grandmother prayed
aloud for the body and soul of her daughter, the boy repeated
over and over in his mind: “I wish you’d come home,
Aunt Harrie. It’s lonesome around here! Gee, I wish you’d
come home.”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap20'>CHAPTER XX</h1></div>

<h3>Hey, Boy!</h3>

<p class='pindent'>In the lobby of the Drummer’s Hotel there were six large
brass spittoons—one in the center of the place, one in each
corner, and one near the clerk’s desk. It was Sandy’s duty to
clean these spittoons. Every evening that winter after
school he came in the back door of the hotel, put his books
in the closet where he kept his brooms and cleaning rags,
swept the two short upper halls and the two flights of stairs,
swept the lobby and dusted, then took the spittoons, emptied
their slimy contents into the alley, rinsed them out, and
polished them until they shone as brightly as if they were
made of gold. Except for the stench of emptying them,
Sandy rather liked this job. He always felt very proud of
himself when, about six o’clock, he could look around the
dingy old lobby and see the six gleaming brass bowls catching
the glow of the electric lamps on their shining surfaces
before they were again covered with spit. The thought that
he himself had created this brightness with his own hands,
aided by a can of brass-polish, never failed to make Sandy
happy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He liked to clean things, to make them beautiful, to make
them shine. Aunt Hager did, too. When she wasn’t washing
clothes, she was always cleaning something about the
house, dusting, polishing the range, or scrubbing the
kitchen floor until it was white enough to eat from. To
Hager a clean thing was beautiful—also to Sandy, proud
every evening of his six unblemished brass spittoons. Yet
each day when he came to work, they were covered anew
with tobacco juice, cigarette-butts, wads of chewing-gum,
and phlegm. But to make them clean was Sandy’s job—and
they were beautiful when they were clean.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Charlie Nutter was right—there was nothing very hard
about the work and he liked it for a while. The new kinds of
life which he saw in the hotel interested and puzzled him,
but, being naturally a silent child, he asked no questions,
and, beyond the directions for his work, nobody told him
anything. Sandy did his cleaning well and the boss had not
yet had occasion to bellow at him, as he often bellowed at
the two bell-boys.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Drummer’s Hotel was not a large hotel, nor a nice
one. A three-story frame structure, dilapidated and run
down, it had not been painted for years. In the lobby two
large panes of plate glass looked on the street, and in front
of these were rows of hard wooden chairs. At the rear of the
lobby was the clerk’s desk, a case of cigars and cigarettes, a
cooler for water, and the door to the men’s room. It was
Sandy’s duty to clean this toilet, too.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Upstairs on the second and third floors were the bedrooms.
Only the poorest of travelling salesmen, transient
railroad workers, occasionally a few show-people, and the
ladies of the streets with their clients rented them. The
night trade was always the most brisk at the Drummer’s
Hotel, but it was only on Saturdays that Sandy worked after
six o’clock. That night he would not get home until ten or
eleven, but Aunt Hager would always be waiting for him,
keeping the fire warm, with the wash-tub full of water for
his weekly bath.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no dining-room attached to the hotel, and,
aside from Sandy, there were only five employees. The boss
himself, Joe Willis, was usually at the desk. There were two
chambermaids who worked in the mornings, an old man
who did the heavy cleaning and scrubbing once or twice a
week, and two bell-boys—one night boy and one day boy
supposedly, but both bellmen had been there so long that
they arranged the hours to suit themselves. Charlie Nutter
had started small, like Sandy, and had grown up there. The
other bell-boy, really no boy at all, but an old man, had been
in the hotel ever since it opened, and Sandy was as much
afraid of him as he was of the boss.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This bellman’s name was Mr. George Clark. His uniform
was frayed and greasy, but he wore it with the air of a major,
and he acted as though all the burdens of running the hotel
were on his shoulders. He knew how everything was to be
done, where everything was kept, what every old guest
liked. And he could divine the tastes of each new guest before
he had been there a day. Subservient and grinning to
white folks, evil and tyrannical to the colored help, George
was the chief authority, next to Joe Willis, in the Drummer’s
Hotel. It was he who found some fault with Sandy’s work
every day until he learned to like the child because Sandy
never answered back or tried to be fly, as George said most
young niggers were. After a time the old fellow seldom
bothered to inspect Sandy’s spittoons or to look in the corners
for dust, but, nevertheless, he remained a person to be
humored and obeyed if one wished to work at the Drummer’s
Hotel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Besides being the boss’s right-hand man, George Clark
was the official bootlegger for the house, too. In fact, he
kept his liquor-supply in the hotel cellar. When he was off
duty, Charlie, the other bell-hop, sold it for him if there
were any calls from the rooms above. They made no sales
other than to guests of the house, but such sales were frequent.
Some of the white women who used the rooms collected
a commission from George for the sales they helped
make to their men visitors.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy was a long time learning the tricks of hotel work.
“Yuh sure a dumb little joker,” Charlie was constantly informing
him. “But just stay around awhile and yuh’ll get on
to it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christmas came and Sandy sent his mother in Detroit a
big box of drugstore candy. For Aunt Hager he started to
buy a long pair of green earrings for fifty cents, but he was
afraid she might not like them, so he bought her white
handkerchiefs instead. And he sent a pretty card to Harriett,
for one snowy December day his aunt had seen him
through the windows sweeping out the lobby of the hotel
and she had called him to the door to talk to her. She thrust
a little piece of paper into his hand with her new address
on it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maudel’s moved to Kansas City,” she said, “so I don’t
live there any more. You better keep this address yourself
and if mama ever needs me, you can know where I am.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then she went on through the snow, looking very pretty
in a cheap fur coat and black high-heeled slippers, with grey
silk stockings. Sandy saw her pass the hotel often with different
men. Sometimes she went by with Cudge Windsor,
the owner of the pool hall, or Billy Sanderlee. Almost always
she was with sporty-looking fellows who wore derbies
and had gold teeth. Sandy noticed that she didn’t urge him
to come to see her at this new house-number she had given
him, so he put the paper in his pocket and went back to his
sweeping, glad, anyway, to have seen his Aunt Harriett.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One Saturday afternoon several white men were sitting
in the lobby smoking and reading the papers. Sandy swept
around their chairs, dusted, and then took the spittoons out
to clean. This work did not require his attention; while he
applied the polish with a handful of soft rags, he could let
his mind wander to other things. He thought about Harriett.
Then he thought about school and what he would do
when he was a man; about Willie-Mae, who had a job washing
dinner dishes for a white family; about Jimmy Lane,
who had no mama; and Sandy wondered what his own
mother and father were doing in another town, and if they
wanted him with them. He thought how old and tired and
grey-headed Aunt Hager had become; how she puffed and
blowed over the wash-tubs now, but never complained; how
she waited for him on Saturday nights with the kitchen-stove
blazing, so he would be warm after walking so far in
the cold; and how she prayed he would be a great man some
day.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sitting there in the back room of the hotel, Sandy
wondered how people got to be great, as, one by one, he
made the spittoons bright and beautiful. He wondered how
people made themselves great.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That night he would have to work late picking up papers
in the lobby, running errands for the boss, and shining
shoes. After he had put the spittoons around, he would go
out and get a hamburger sandwich and a cup of coffee for
supper; then he would come back and help Charlie if he
could.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Charlie was a good old boy. He had taken only a
dollar for getting Sandy his job and he often helped him
make tips by allowing Sandy to run to the telegraph office or
do some other little odd job for a guest upstairs.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sure,
Charlie was a nice guy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Things were pretty busy tonight. Several men had their
shoes shined as they sat tipped back in the lobby chairs
while Sandy with his boot-black box let them put up a foot
at a time to be polished. One tall farmer gave him a quarter
tip and a pat on the head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Bright little feller, that,” he remarked to the boss.</p>

<p class='pindent'>About ten o’clock the blond Miss Marcia McKay’s bell
rang, and, Charlie being engaged, Joe Willis sent Sandy up
to see what she wanted. Miss McKay had just come in out of
the snow a short time before with a heavy-set man. Both of
them were drunk. Sandy knocked timidly outside her room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come in,” growled the man’s voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy opened the door and saw Miss McKay standing
naked in the middle of the floor combing her hair. He
stopped on the threshold.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, come in,” said the man. “She won’t bite you! Where’s
that other bell-boy? We want some licker! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Damn it! Say,
send Charlie up here! He knows what I want!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy scampered away, and when he found Charlie, he
told him about Miss McKay. The child was scared because
he had often heard of colored boys’ being lynched for looking
at white women, even with their clothes on—but the
bell-boy only laughed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yuh’re a dumb little joker!” he said. “Just stay around
here awhile and yuh’ll see lots more’n that!” He winked and
gave Sandy a nudge in the ribs. “Boy, I done sold ten quarts
o’ licker tonight,” he whispered jubilantly. “And some a it
was mine, too!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy went back to the lobby and the shining of shoes. A
big, red-necked stranger smoking and drinking with a
crowd of drummers in one corner of the room called to him
“Hey, boy! Shine me up here!” So he edged into the center
of the group of men with his blacking-box, got down on his
knees before the big fellow, took out his cans and his cloths,
and went to work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The white men were telling dirty stories, uglier than any
Sandy had heard at the colored barber-shop and not very
funny—and some of them made him sick at the stomach.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The big man whose shoes he was shining said: “Now I’m
gonna tell one.” He talked with a Southern drawl and a soft
slurring of word-endings like some old colored folks. He
had been drinking, too. “This is ’bout a nigger went to see
Aunt Hanner one night.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A roar of laughter greeted his first effort and he was encouraged
to tell another.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Old darky caught a gal on the levee .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” he commenced.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy finished polishing the shoes and put the cloths inside
his wooden box and stood up waiting for his pay, but
the speaker did not notice the colored boy until he had finished
his tale and laughed heartily with the other men.
Then he looked at Sandy. Suddenly he grinned.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Say, little coon, let’s see you hit a step for the boys! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Down where I live, folks, all our niggers can dance!
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Come on, boy, snap it up!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t,” Sandy said, frowning instead of smiling, and
growing warm as he stood there in the smoky circle of grinning
white men. “I don’t know how to dance.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, you’re one of them stubborn Kansas coons, heh?”
said the red-necked fellow disgustedly, the thickness of
whisky on his tongue. “You Northern darkies are dumb as
hell, anyhow!” Then, turning to the crowd of amused lobby
loungers, he announced: “Now down in Mississippi, whar I
come from, if you offer a nigger a dime, he’ll dance his can
off .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. an’ they better dance, what I mean!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned to the men around him for approbation, while
Sandy still waited uncomfortably to be paid for the shine.
But the man kept him standing there, looking at him
drunkenly, then at the amused crowd of Saturday-night
loungers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now, a nigger his size down South would no more think
o’ not dancin’ if a white man asked him than he would think
o’ flyin’. This boy’s jest tryin’ to be smart, that’s all. Up here
you-all’ve got darkies spoilt, believin’ they’re somebody.
Now, in my home we keep ’em in their places.” He again
turned his attention to Sandy. “Boy! I want to see you
dance!” he commanded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy picked up his blacking-box and had begun to
push through the circle of chairs, not caring any longer
about his pay, when the Southerner rose and grabbed him
roughly by the arm, exhaling alcoholic breath in the boy’s
face as he jokingly pulled him back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Com’ere, you little—” but he got no further, for Sandy,
strengthened by the anger that suddenly possessed him at
the touch of this white man’s hand, uttered a yell that could
be heard for blocks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Everyone in the lobby turned to see what had happened,
but before Joe Willis got out from behind the clerk’s desk,
the boy, wriggling free, had reached the street-door. There
Sandy turned, raised his boot-black box furiously above his
head, and flung it with all his strength at the group of
laughing white men in which the drunken Southerner was
standing. From one end of the whizzing box a stream of
polish-bottles, brushes, and cans fell clattering across the
lobby while Sandy disappeared through the door, running
as fast as his legs could carry him in the falling snow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hey! You black bastard!” Joe Willis yelled from the hotel
entrance, but his voice was blown away in the darkness.
As Sandy ran, he felt the snow-flakes falling in his face.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap21'>CHAPTER XXI</h1></div>

<h3>Note to Harriett</h3>

<p class='pindent'>Several days later, when Sandy took out of his pocket the
piece of paper that his Aunt Harriett had given him that day
in front of the hotel, he noticed that the address written on
it was somewhere in the Bottoms. He felt vaguely worried,
so he did not show it to his grandmother, because he had often
heard her say that the Bottoms was a bad place. And
when he was working at the barber-shop, he had heard the
men talking about what went on there—and in a sense he
knew what they meant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a gay place—people did what they wanted to, or
what they had to do, and didn’t care—for in the Bottoms
folks ceased to struggle against the boundaries between
good and bad, or white and black, and surrendered amiably
to immorality. Beyond Pearl Street, across the tracks, people
of all colors came together for the sake of joy, the curtains
being drawn only between themselves and the
opposite side of the railroad, where the churches were and
the big white Y.M.C.A.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At night in the Bottoms victrolas moaned and banjos
cried ecstatically in the darkness. Summer evenings little
yellow and brown and black girls in pink or blue bungalow
aprons laughed invitingly in doorways, and dice rattled with
the staccato gaiety of jazz music on long tables in rear
rooms. Pimps played pool; bootleggers lounged in big red
cars; children ran in the streets until midnight, with no
voice of parental authority forcing them to an early sleep;
young blacks fought like cocks and enjoyed it; white boys
walked through the streets winking at colored girls; men
came in autos; old women ate pigs’ feet and watermelon and
drank beer; whisky flowed; gin was like water; soft indolent
laughter didn’t care about anything; and deep nigger-throated
voices that had long ago stopped rebelling against
the ways of this world rose in song.</p>

<p class='pindent'>To those who lived on the other side of the railroad and
never realized the utter stupidity of the word “sin,” the Bottoms
was vile and wicked. But to the girls who lived there,
and the boys who pimped and fought and sold licker there,
“sin” was a silly word that did not enter their heads. They
had never looked at life through the spectacles of the Sunday
School. The glasses good people wore wouldn’t have fitted
their eyes, for they hung no curtain of words between
themselves and reality. To them, things were—what they
were.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Ma bed is hard, but I’m layin’ in it jest de same!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>sang the raucous-throated blues-singer in her song;</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Hey! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Hey! Who wants to lay with me?</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>It was to one of these streets in the Bottoms that Sandy
came breathlessly one bright morning with a note in his
hand. He knocked at the door of a big grey house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is this where Harriett Williams lives?” he panted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You means Harrietta?” said a large, sleek yellow woman
in a blue silk kimono who opened the door. “Come in, baby,
and sit down. I’ll see if she’s up yet.” Then the woman left
Sandy in the parlor while she went up the stairs calling his
aunt in a clear, lazy voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were heavy velvet draperies at the windows and
doors in this front room where Sandy sat, and a thick, well-worn
rug on the floor. There was a divan, a davenport covered
with pillows, a center table, and several chairs.
Through the curtains at the double door leading into the
next room, Sandy saw a piano, more sofas and chairs, and a
cleared oiled floor that might be used for dancing. Both
rooms were in great disorder, and the air in the house
smelled stale and beerish. Licker-bottles and ginger-ale
bottles were underneath the center table, underneath the
sofas, and on top of the piano. Ash-trays were everywhere,
overflowing with cigar-butts and cigarette-ends—on the
floor, under chairs, overturned among the sofa-pillows. A
small brass tray under one of the sofas held a half-dozen
small glasses, some of them still partly full of whisky or gin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy sat down to wait for his aunt. It was very quiet in
the house, although it was almost ten o’clock. A man came
down the stairs with his coat on his arm, blinking sleepily.
He passed through the hall and out into the street. Bedroom-slippered
feet shuffled to the head of the steps on the
second floor, and the lazy woman’s voice called: “She’ll be
down in a minute, darling. Just wait there.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy waited. He heard the splash of water above and the
hoarse gurgling of a bath-tub being emptied. Presently
Harriett appeared in a little pink wash dress such as a child
wears, the skirt striking her just above the knees. She
smelled like cashmere-bouquet soap, and her face was not
yet powdered, nor her hair done up, but she was smiling
broadly, happy to see her nephew, as her arms went round
his neck.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My! I’m glad to see you, honey! How’d you happen to
come? How’d you find me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Grandma’s sick,” said Sandy. “She’s awful sick and Aunt
Tempy sent you this note.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl opened the letter. It read:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='pindent'>Your mother is not expected to live. You better come to see
her since she has asked for you. Tempy.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>“O! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Wait a minute,” said Harriett softly. “I’ll hurry.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy sat down again in the room full of ash-trays and
licker-bottles. Many feet pattered upstairs, and, as doors
opened and closed, women’s voices were heard: “Can I help
you, girlie? Can I lend you anything? Does you need a
veil?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Harriett came down she was wearing a tan coat-suit
and a white turban pulled tight on her head. Her face
was powdered and her lips rouged ever so slightly. The bag
she carried was beaded, blue and gold.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on, Sandy,” she said. “I guess I’m ready.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As they went out, they heard a man’s voice in a shabby
house across the street singing softly to a two-finger piano
accompaniment:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Sugar babe, I’m leavin’</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An’ it won’t be long.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='noindent'>While outside, on his front door-step, two nappy-headed
little yellow kids were solemnly balling-the-jack.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>Two days before, Sandy had come home from school and
found his grandmother lying across the bed, the full tubs
still standing in the kitchen, her clothes not yet hung out to
dry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the matter?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’s washed down, chile,” said the old woman, panting. “I
feels kinder tired-like, that’s all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy knew that there must be something else wrong
with Aunt Hager, because he had never seen her lying on
the bed in broad daylight, with her clothes still in the tubs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Does your back ache?” asked the child.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I does feel a little misery,” sighed Aunt Hager. “But
seems to be mo’ ma side an’ not ma back this time. But
’tain’t nothin’. I’s just tired.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy was scared. “You want some soda and water,
grandma?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, honey.” Then, in her usual tones of assumed anger:
“Go on away from here an’ let a body rest. Ain’t I told you
they ain’t nothin’ the matter ’ceptin’ I’s all washed out an’
just got to lay down a minute? Go on an’ fetch in yo’
wood .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. an’ spin yo’ top out yonder with Buster and them.
Go on!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was nearly five o’clock when the boy came in again.
Aunt Hager was sitting in the rocker near the stove then,
her face drawn and ashy. She had been trying to finish her
washing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Chile, go get Sister Johnson an’ ask her if she can’t wring
out ma clothes fo’ me—Mis’ Dunset ain’t sent much washin’
this week, an’ you can help her hang ’em up. I reckon it ain’t
gonna rain tonight, so’s they can dry befo’ mawnin’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy ran towards the door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now, don’t butt your brains out!” said the old lady.
“Ain’t no need o’ runnin’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not only did Sister Johnson come at once and hang out
the washing, but she made Hager get in bed, with a hot-water
bottle on her paining side. And she gave her a big dose of
peppermint and water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I ’spects it’s from yo’ stomick,” she said. “I knows you et
cabbage fo’ dinner!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maybe ’tis,” said Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sister Johnson took Sandy to her house for supper that
evening and he and Willie-Mae ate five sweet potatoes each.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You-all gwine bust!” said Tom Johnson.</p>

<p class='pindent'>About nine o’clock the boy went to bed with his grandmother,
and all that night Hager tossed and groaned, in
spite of her efforts to lie quiet and not keep Sandy awake. In
the morning she said: “Son, I reckon you better stay home
from school, ’cause I’s feelin’ mighty po’ly. Seems like that
cabbage ain’t digested yet. Feels like I done et a
stone.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Go see if you can’t make de fire up an’ heat me a
cup o’ hot water.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>About eleven o’clock Madam de Carter came over. “I
thought I didn’t perceive you nowhere in the yard this
morning and the sun ’luminating so bright and cheerful.
You ain’t indispensed, are you? Sandy said you was kinder
ill.” She chattered away. “You know it don’t look natural not
to see you hanging out clothes long before the noon
comes.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I ain’t well a-tall this mawnin’,” said Hager when she got
a chance to speak. “I’s feelin’ right bad. I suffers with a pain
in ma side; seems like it ain’t gettin’ no better. Sister Johnson
just left here from rubbin’ it, but I still suffers terrible
an’ can’t eat nothin’.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You can use de phone, can’t you,
Sister Carter?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, yes! Yes indeedy! I oftens phones from over to
Mis’ Petit’s. You think you needs a physicianer?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In spite of herself a groan came from the old woman’s lips
as she tried to turn towards her friend. Aunt Hager, who
had never moaned for lesser hurts, did not intend to complain
over this one—but the pain!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s cuttin’ me in two.” She gasped. “Send fo’ old Doc
McDillors an’ he’ll come.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Madam de Carter, proud and important at the prospect
of using her white neighbor’s phone, rushed away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t know you were so sick, grandma!” Sandy’s eyes
were wide with fright and sympathy. “I’m gonna get Mis’
Johnson to come rub you again.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O, ma Lawd, help!” Alone for a moment with no
one to hear her, she couldn’t hold back the moans any
longer. A cold sweat stood on her forehead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The doctor came—the kind old white man who had
known Hager for years and in whom she had faith.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well,” he said, “it’s quite a surprise to see you in bed,
Aunty.” Then, looking very serious and professional, he
took her pulse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go out and close the door,” he said gently to Madam de
Carter and Sister Johnson, Willie-Mae and Sandy, all of
whom had gathered around the bed in the little room.
“Somebody heat some water.” He turned back the quilts
from the woman’s body and unbuttoned her gown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ten minutes later he said frankly, but with great kindness
in his tones: “You’re a sick woman, Hager, a very sick
woman.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>That afternoon Tempy came, like a stranger to the house,
and took charge of things. Sandy felt uncomfortable and
shy in her presence. This aunt of his had a hard, cold, correct
way of talking that resembled Mrs. Rice’s manner of
speaking to his mother when Annjee used to work there.
But Tempy quickly put the house in order, bathed her
mother, and spread the bed with clean sheets and a white
counterpane. Before evening, members of Hager’s lodge
began to drop in bringing soups and custards. White people
of the neighborhood stopped, too, to inquire if there was
anything they could do for the old woman who had so often
waited on them in their illnesses. About six o’clock old man
Logan drove up the alley and tied his white mule to the
back fence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sun was setting when Tempy called Sandy in from
the back yard, where he was chopping wood for the stove.
She said: “James”—how queerly his correct name struck his
ears as it fell from the lips of this cold aunt!—“James, you
had better send this telegram to your mother. Now, here is a
dollar bill and you can bring back the change. Look on her
last letter and get the correct address.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy took the written sheet of paper and the money that
his aunt gave him. Then he looked through the various
drawers in the house for his mother’s last letter. It had been
nearly a month since they had heard from her, but finally
the boy found the letter in the cupboard, under a jelly-glass
full of small coins that his grandmother kept there. He carried
the envelope with him to the telegraph office, and
there he paid for a message to Annjee in Detroit:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='pindent'>Mother very sick, come at once. Tempy.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>As the boy walked home in the gathering dusk, he felt
strangely alone in the world, as though Aunt Hager had already
gone away, and when he reached the house, it was full
of lodge members who had come to keep watch. Tempy
went home, but Sister Johnson remained in the sick-room,
changing the hot-water bottles and administering, every
three hours, the medicine the doctor had left.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were so many people in the house that Sandy came
out into the back yard and sat down on the edge of the well.
It was cool and clear, and a slit of moon rode in a light-blue
sky spangled with stars. Soon the apple-trees would bud and
the grass would be growing. Sandy was a big boy. When his
next birthday came, he would be fourteen, and he had begun
to grow tall and heavy. Aunt Hager said she was going
to buy him a pair of long pants this coming summer. And
his mother would hardly know him when she saw him
again, if she ever came home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tonight inside, there were so many old sisters from the
lodge that Sandy couldn’t even talk to his grandmother
while she lay in bed. They were constantly going in and out
of the sick-room, drinking coffee in the kitchen, or gossiping
in the parlor. He wished they would all go away. He
could take care of his grandmother himself until she got
well—he and Sister Johnson. They didn’t even need Tempy,
who, he felt, shouldn’t be there, because he didn’t like her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They callin’ you inside,” Willie-Mae came out to tell
him as he sat by himself in the cold on the edge of the well.
She was taller than Sandy now and had a regular job taking
care of a white lady’s baby. She no longer wore her hair in
braids. She did it up, and she had a big leather pocket—book
that she carried on her arm like a woman. Boys came to take
her to the movies on Saturday nights. “They want you inside.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy got up, his legs stiff and numb, and went into the
kitchen. An elderly brown woman, dressed in black silk that
swished as she moved, opened the door to Hager’s bedroom
and whispered to him loudly: “Be quiet, chile.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy entered between a lane of old women. Hager
looked up at him and smiled—so grave and solemn he appeared.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is they takin’ care o’ you?” she asked weakly. “Ain’t it
bedtime, honey? Is you had something to eat? Come on an’
kiss yo’ old grandma befo’ you go to sleep. She’ll be better
in de mawnin’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She couldn’t seem to lift her head, so Sandy sat down on
the bed and kissed her. All he said was: “I’m all right,
grandma,” because there were so many old women in there
that he couldn’t talk. Then he went out into the other room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The air in the house was close and stuffy and the boy
soon became groggy with sleep. He fell across the bed that
had been Annjee’s, and later Dogberry’s, with all his clothes
on. One of the lodge women in the room said: “You better
take off yo’ things, chile, an’ go to sleep right.” Then she
said to the other sisters: “Come on in de kitchen, you-all,
an’ let this chile go to bed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the morning Tempy woke him. “Are you sure you had
Annjee’s address correct last night?” she demanded. “The
telegraph office says she couldn’t be found, so the message
was not delivered. Let me see the letter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy found the letter again, and the address was verified.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, that’s strange,” said Tempy. “I suppose, as careless
and irresponsible as Jimboy is, they’ve got it wrong, or else
moved.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Do you know where Harriett can be? I don’t
suppose you do, but mother has been calling for her all
night. I suppose we’ll have to try to get her, wherever she is.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I got her address,” said Sandy. “She wrote it down for me
when I was working at the hotel this winter. I can find her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Then I’ll give you a note,” said Tempy. “Take it to her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So Sandy went to the big grey house in the Bottoms that
morning to deliver Tempy’s message, before the girls there
had risen from their beds.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap22'>CHAPTER XXII</h1></div>

<h3>Beyond the Jordan</h3>

<p class='pindent'>During the day the lodge members went to their work in
the various kitchens and restaurants and laundries of the
town. And Madam de Carter was ordered to Tulsa, Oklahoma,
where a split in her organization was threatened because
of the elections of the grand officers. Hager was
resting easy, no pain now, but very weak.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s only a matter of time,” said the doctor. “Give her the
medicine so she won’t worry, but it does no good. There’s
nothing we can do.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s going to die!” Sandy thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett sat by the bedside holding her mother’s hand as
the afternoon sunlight fell on the white spread. Hager had
been glad to see the girl again, and the old woman held
nothing against her daughter for no longer living at home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is you happy, chile?” Hager asked. “You looks so nice.
Yo’ clothes is right purty. I hopes you’s findin’ what you
wants in life. You’s young, honey, an’ you needs to be
happy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy!” She called so weakly that he could
hardly hear her, though he was standing at the head of the
bed. “Sandy, look in that drawer, chile, under ma night-gowns
an’ things, an’ hand me that there little box you sees
down in de corner.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child found it and gave it to her, a small, white box
from a cheap jeweller’s. It was wrapped carefully in a soft
handkerchief. The old woman took it eagerly and tried to
hold it out towards her daughter. Harriett unwound the
handkerchief and opened the lid of the box. Then she saw
that it contained the tiny gold watch that her mother had
given her on her sixteenth birthday, which she had pawned
months ago in order to run away with the carnival. Quick
tears came to the girl’s eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I got it out o’ pawn fo’ you,” Hager said, “ ’cause I
wanted you to have it fo’ yo’self, chile. You know yo’ mammy
bought it fo’ you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was such a little watch! Old-timy, with a breastpin on it.
Harriett quickly put her handkerchief over her wrist to hide
the flashy new time-piece she was wearing on a gold
bracelet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That night Hager died. The undertakers came at dawn
with their wagon and carried the body away to embalm it.
Sandy stood on the front porch looking at the morning star
as the clatter of the horses’ hoofs echoed in the street. A
sleepy young white boy was driving the undertaker’s wagon,
and the horse that pulled it was white.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The women who had been sitting up all night began to
go home now to get their husbands’ breakfasts and to prepare
to go to work themselves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s Wednesday,” Sandy thought. “Today I’m supposed
to go get Mrs. Reinhart’s clothes, but grandma’s dead. I
guess I won’t get them now. There’s nobody to wash them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sister Johnson called him to the kitchen to drink a cup of
coffee. Harriett was there weeping softly. Tempy was inside
busily cleaning the room from which they had removed the
body. She had opened all the windows and was airing the
house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Out in the yard a rooster flapped his wings and crowed
shrilly at the rising sun. The fire crackled, and the coffee
boiling sent up a fragrant aroma. Sister Johnson opened a
can of condensed milk by punching it with the butcher-knife.
She put some cups and saucers on the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tempy, won’t you have some?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, thank you, Mrs. Johnson,” she called from the dead
woman’s bedroom.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Aunt Hager was brought back to her house, she
was in a long box covered with black plush. They placed it
on a folding stand by the window in the front room. There
was a crepe on the door, and the shades were kept lowered,
and people whispered in the house as though someone were
asleep. Flowers began to be delivered by boys on bicycles,
and the lodge members came to sit up again that night. The
time was set for burial, and the <span class='it'>Daily Leader</span> carried this
paragraph in small type on its back page:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'>Hager Williams, aged colored laundress of 419 Cypress
Street, passed away at her home last night. She was known
and respected by many white families in the community.
Three daughters and a grandson survive.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>They tried again to reach Annjee in Detroit by telegram,
but without success. On the afternoon of the funeral it was
cold and rainy. The little Baptist Church was packed with
people. The sisters of the lodge came in full regalia, with
banners and insignia, and the brothers turned out with
them. Hager’s coffin was banked with flowers. There were
many fine pieces from the families for whom she had
washed and from the white neighbors she had nursed in
sickness. There were offerings, too, from Tempy’s high-toned
friends and from Harriett’s girl companions in the
house in the Bottoms. Many of the bell-boys, porters, and
bootleggers sent wreaths and crosses with golden letters on
them: “At Rest in Jesus,” “Beyond the Jordan,” or simply:
“Gone Home.” There was a bouquet of violets from
Buster’s mother and a blanket of roses from Tempy herself.
They were all pretty, but, to Sandy, the perfume was sickening
in the close little church.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Baptist minister preached, but Tempy had Father
Hill from her church to say a few words, too. The choir sang
<span class='it'>Shall We Meet Beyond the River?</span> People wept and fainted. The
services seemed interminable. Then came the long drive to
the cemetery in horse-drawn hacks, with a few automobiles
in line behind. In at the wide gates and through a vast expanse
of tombstones the procession passed, across the
graveyard, towards the far, lonesome corner where most of
the Negroes rested. There Sandy saw the open grave. Then
he saw the casket going down .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. down .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. down, into the
earth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The boy stood quietly between his Aunt Tempy and his
Aunt Harriett at the edge of the grave while Tempy stared
straight ahead in the drizzling rain, and Harriett cried,
streaking the powder on her cheeks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s all right, mama,” Harriett sobbed to the body in
the long, black box. “You won’t get lonesome out here. Harrie’ll
come back tomorrow. Harrie’ll come back every day
and bring you flowers. You won’t get lonesome, mama.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were throwing wet dirt on the coffin as the mourners
walked away through the sticky clay towards their carriages.
Some old sister at the grave began to sing:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Dark was the night,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Cold was the ground .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>in a high weird monotone. Others took it up, and, as the
mourners drove away, the air was filled with the minor wailing
of the old women. Harriett was wearing Hager’s gift,
the little gold watch, pinned beneath her coat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they got back to the house where Aunt Hager had
lived for so long, Sister Johnson said the mail-man had left a
letter under the door that afternoon addressed to the dead
woman. Harriett was about to open it when Tempy took it
from her. It was from Annjee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dear mama,” it began.</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'>We have moved to Toledo because Jimboy thought he
would do better here and the reason I haven’t written, we
have been so long getting settled. I have been out of work
but we both got jobs now and maybe I will be able to send
you some money soon. I hope you are well, ma, and all right.
Kiss Sandy for me and take care of yourself. With love and
God’s blessings from your daughter,</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'><span class='sc'>Annjee</span></p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>Tempy immediately turned the letter over and wrote on
the back:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'>We buried your mother today. I tried to reach you in Detroit,
but could not get you, since you were no longer there
and neglected to send us your new address. It is too bad you
weren’t here for the funeral. Your child is going to stay with
me until I hear from you.</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'><span class='sc'>Tempy</span></p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>Then she turned to the boy, who stood dazed beside Sister
Johnson in the silent, familiar old house. “You will come
home with me, James,” she said. “We’ll see that this place is
locked first. You try all the windows and I’ll fasten the
doors; then we’ll go out the front.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mrs. Johnson, it’s
been good of you to help us in our troubles. Thank you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sister Johnson went home, leaving Harriett in the parlor.
When Sandy and Tempy returned from locking the back
windows and doors, they found the girl still standing there,
and for a moment the two sisters looked at one another in
silence. Then Tempy said coldly: “We’re going.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett went out alone into the drizzling rain. Tempy
tried the parlor windows to be sure they were well fastened;
then, stepping outside on the porch, she locked the door
and put the key in her bag.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on,” she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy looked up and down the street, but in the thick
twilight of fog and rain Harriett had disappeared, so he followed
his aunt into the waiting cab. As the hack clattered
off, the boy gave an involuntary shiver.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you want to hold my hand?” Tempy asked, unbending
a little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” Sandy said. So they rode in silence.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap23'>CHAPTER XXIII</h1></div>

<h3>Tempy’s House</h3>

<p class='pindent'>“James, you must getup on time in this house. Breakfast has
been ready twenty minutes. I can’t come upstairs every
morning to call you. You are old enough now to wake yourself
and you must learn to do so—you’ve too far to walk to
school to lie abed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy tumbled out. Tempy left the room so that he would
be free to dress, and soon he came downstairs to breakfast.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had never had a room of his own before. He had never
even slept in a room alone, but here his aunt had given him
a small chamber on the second floor which had a window
that looked out into a tidy back yard where there was a brick
walk running to the back gate. The room, which was very
clean, contained only the bed, one chair, and a dresser.
There was, too, a little closet in which to hang clothes, but
Sandy did not have many to put in it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The thing that impressed him most about the second
floor was the bathroom. He had never lived where there was
running water indoors. And in this room, too, everything
was so spotlessly clean that Sandy was afraid to move lest he
disturb something or splash water on the wall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he came downstairs for breakfast, he found the
table set for two. Mr. Siles, being in the railway postal service,
was out on a trip. The grapefruit was waiting as Sandy
slid shyly into his place opposite the ash-brown woman who
had become his guardian since his grandma’s death. She
bowed her head to say a short grace; then they ate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Have you been accustomed to drinking milk in the
mornings?” Tempy asked as they were finishing the meal.
“If you have, the milkman can leave another bottle. Young
people should have plenty of milk.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m, I’d like it, but we only had coffee at home.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You needn’t say ‘yes’m’ in this house. We are not used to
slavery talk here. If you like milk, I’ll get it for
you.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Now, how are your clothes? I see your stocking has
a hole in it, and one pants-leg is hanging.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It don’t stay fastened.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It <span class='it'>doesn’t</span>, James! I’ll buy you some more pants tomorrow.
What else do you need?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy told her, and in a few days she took him to
Wertheimer’s, the city’s largest store, and outfitted him
completely. And, as they shopped, she informed him that
she was the only colored woman in town who ran a bill
there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want white people to know that Negroes have a little
taste; that’s why I always trade at good shops.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And if
you’re going to live with me, you’ll have to learn to do
things right, too.”</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:center;'>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tearful letter that came from Annjee when she heard
of her mother’s death said that Toledo was a very difficult
place to get work in, and that she had no money to send
railroad fare for Sandy, but that she would try to send for
him as soon as she could. Jimboy was working on a lake
steamer and was seldom home, and she couldn’t have Sandy
with her anyway until they got a nicer place to stay; so
would Tempy please keep him a little while?</p>

<p class='pindent'>By return post Tempy replied that if Annjee had any
sense, she would let Sandy remain in Stanton, where he
could get a good education, and not be following after his
worthless father all over the country. Mr. Siles and she had
no children, and Sandy seemed like a quiet, decent child,
smart in his classes. Colored people needed to encourage
talent so that the white race would realize Negroes weren’t
all mere guitar-players and house-maids. And Sandy could
be a credit if he were raised right. Of course, Tempy knew he
hadn’t had the correct environment to begin with—living
with Jimboy and Harriett and going to a Baptist church, but
undoubtedly he could be trained. He was young. “And I
think it would be only fair to the boy that you let him stay
with us, because, Annjee, you are certainly not the person to
bring him up as he should be reared.” The letter was signed:
“Your sister, Tempy,” and written properly with pen and ink.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So it happened that Sandy came to live with Mr. and Mrs.
Arkins Siles, for that was the name by which his aunt and uncle
were known in the Negro society of the town. Mr. Siles
was a mail-clerk on the railroad—a position that colored
people considered a high one because you were working for
“Uncle Sam.” He was a paste-colored man of forty-eight
who had inherited three houses from his father.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tempy, when she married, had owned houses too, one of
which had been willed her by Mrs. Barr-Grant, for whom
she had worked for years as personal maid. She had acquired
her job while yet in high school, and Mrs. Barr-Grant,
who travelled a great deal in the interest of woman
suffrage and prohibition, had taken Tempy east with her.
On their return to Stanton she allowed the colored maid to
take charge of her home, where she also employed a cook
and a parlor girl. Thus was the mistress left free to write
pamphlets and prepare lectures on the various evils of the
world standing in need of correction.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tempy pleased Mrs. Barr-Grant by being prompt and exact
in obeying orders and by appearing to worship her Puritan
intelligence. In truth Tempy did worship her mistress,
for the colored girl found that by following Mrs. Barr-Grant’s
early directions she had become an expert housekeeper;
by imitating her manner of speech she had acquired
a precise flow of language; and by reading her books she
had become interested in things that most Negro girls
never thought about. Several times the mistress had remarked
to her maid: “You’re so smart and such a good,
clean, quick little worker, Tempy, that it’s too bad you aren’t
white.” And Tempy had taken this to heart, not as an insult,
but as a compliment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the white lady died, she left one of her small houses
to her maid as a token of appreciation for faithful services.
By dint of saving, and of having resided with her mistress
where there had been no living expenses, Tempy had managed
to buy another house, too. When Mr. Siles asked her to
be his wife, everybody said it was a fine match, for both
owned property, both were old enough to know what they
wanted, and both were eminently respectable.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Now they
prospered together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tempy no longer worked out, but stayed home, keeping
house, except that she went each month to collect her rents
and those of her husband. She had a woman to do the laundry
and help with the cleaning, but Tempy herself did the
cooking, and all her meals were models of economical
preparation. Just enough food was prepared each time for
three people. Sandy never had a third helping of dessert in
her house. No big pots of black-eyed peas and pigtails
scented her front hall, either. She got her recipes from <span class='it'>The
Ladies’ Home Journal</span>—and she never bought a watermelon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>White people were for ever picturing colored folks with
huge slices of watermelon in their hands. Well, she was one
colored woman who did not like them! Her favorite fruits
were tangerines and grapefruit, for Mrs. Barr-Grant had always
eaten those, and Tempy had admired Mrs. Barr-Grant
more than anybody else—more, of course, than she had admired
Aunt Hager, who spent her days at the wash-tub, and
had loved watermelon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Colored people certainly needed to come up in the
world, Tempy thought, up to the level of white people—dress
like white people, talk like white people, think like
white people—and then they would no longer be called
“niggers.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In Tempy this feeling was an emotional reaction, born of
white admiration, but in Mr. Siles, who shared his wife’s
views, the same attitude was born of practical thought. The
whites had the money, and if Negroes wanted any, the
quicker they learned to be like the whites, the better. Stop
being lazy, stop singing all the time, stop attending revivals,
and learn to get the dollar—because money buys everything,
even the respect of white people.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Blues and spirituals Tempy and her husband hated because
they were too Negro. In their house Sandy dared not
sing a word of <span class='it'>Swing Low, Sweet Chariot</span>, for what had darky
slave songs to do with respectable people? And rag-time belonged
in the Bottoms with the sinners. (It was ironically
strange that the Bottoms should be the only section of
Stanton where Negroes and whites mingled freely on equal
terms.) That part of town, according to Tempy, was lost to
God, and the fact that she had a sister living there burned
like a hidden cancer in her breast. She never mentioned
Harriett to anyone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tempy’s friends were all people of standing in the darker
world—doctors, school-teachers, a dentist, a lawyer, a hairdresser.
And she moved among these friends as importantly
as Mrs. Barr-Grant had moved among a similar group in
the white race. Many of them had had wash-women for
mothers and day-laborers for fathers; but none ever spoke
of that. And while Aunt Hager lived, Tempy, after getting
her position with Mrs. Barr-Grant, was seldom seen with
the old woman. After her marriage she was even more
ashamed of her family connections—a little sister running
wild, and another sister married for the sake of love—Tempy
could never abide Jimboy, or understand why Annjee
had taken up with a rounder from the South. One’s
family as a topic of conversation, however, was not popular
in high circles, for too many of Stanton’s dark society folks
had sprung from humble family trees and low black bottoms.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But back in Washington, where I was born,” said Mrs.
Doctor Mitchell once, “we really have blood! All the best
people at the capital come from noted ancestry—Senator
Bruce, John M. Langston, Governor Pinchback, Frederick
Douglass. Why, one of our colored families on their white
side can even trace its lineage back to George Washington!
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O, yes, we have a background! But, of course, we are
too refined to boast about it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tempy thought of her mother then and wished that black
Aunt Hager had not always worn her apron in the streets,
uptown and everywhere! Of course, it was clean and white
and seemed to suit the old lady, but aprons weren’t worn by
the best people. When Tempy was in the hospital for an operation
shortly after her marriage, they wouldn’t let Hager
enter by the front door—and Tempy never knew whether it
was on account of her color or the apron! The Presbyterian
Hospital was prejudiced against Negroes and didn’t like
them to use the elevator, but certainly her mother should
not have come there in an apron!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Well, Aunt Hager had meant well, Tempy thought, even
if she didn’t dress right. And now this child, Sandy—James
was his correct name! At that first breakfast they ate together,
she asked him if he had a comb and brush of his
own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No’m, I ain’t,” said Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I haven’t,” she corrected him. “I certainly don’t want my
white neighbors to hear you saying ‘ain’t’.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You’ve come
to live with me now and you must talk like a gentleman.”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap24'>CHAPTER XXIV</h1></div>

<h3>A Shelf of Books</h3>

<p class='pindent'>That spring, shortly after Sandy went to stay with Tempy,
there was an epidemic of mumps among the school-children
in Stanton, and, old as he was, he was among its early
victims. With jaws swollen to twice their normal size and a
red sign, MUMPS, on the house, he was forced to remain at
home for three weeks. It was then that the boy began to
read books other than the ones he had had to study for his
lessons. At Aunt Hager’s house there had been no books,
anyway, except the Bible and the few fairy tales that he had
been given at Christmas; but Tempy had a case full of dusty
volumes that were used to give dignity to her sitting-room:
a row of English classics bound in red, an <span class='it'>Encyclopedia of
World Knowledge</span> in twelve volumes, a book on household
medicine full of queer drawings, and some modern novels—<span class='it'>The
Rosary</span>, <span class='it'>The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come</span>, the
newest Harold Bell Wright, and all that had ever been written
by Gene Stratton Porter, Tempy’s favorite author. The
Negro was represented by Chesnutt’s <span class='it'>House Behind the
Cedars</span>, and the <span class='it'>Complete Poems</span> of Paul Lawrence Dunbar,
whom Tempy tolerated on account of his fame, but condemned
because he had written so much in dialect and so
often of the lower classes of colored people. Tempy subscribed
to <span class='it'>Harper’s Magazine</span>, too, because Mrs. Barr-Grant
had taken it. And in her sewing-room closet there was also a
pile of <span class='it'>The Crisis</span>, the thin Negro monthly that she had been
taking from the beginning of its publication.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy had heard of that magazine, but he had never seen
a copy; so he went through them all, looking at the pictures
of prominent Negroes and reading about racial activities all
over the country, and about racial wrongs in the South. In
every issue he found, too, stirring and beautifully written
editorials about the frustrated longings of the black race,
and the hidden beauties in the Negro soul. A man named
Du Bois wrote them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dr. William Edward Burghardt Du Bois,” said Tempy,
“and he is a great man.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Great like Booker T. Washington?” asked Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Teaching Negroes to be servants, that’s all Washington
did!” Tempy snorted in so acid a tone that Sandy was silent.
“Du Bois wants our rights. He wants us to be real men and
women. He believes in social equality. But Washington—huh!”
The fact that he had established an industrial school
damned Washington in Tempy’s eyes, for there were enough
colored workers already. But Du Bois was a doctor of philosophy
and had studied in Europe! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. That’s what Negroes
needed to do, get smart, study books, go to Europe! “Don’t
talk to me about Washington,” Tempy fumed. “Take Du
Bois for your model, not some white folks’ nigger.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Aunt Hager said—” then Sandy stopped. His grandmother
had thought that Booker T. was the greatest of men,
but maybe she had been wrong. Anyway, this Du Bois could
write! Gee, it made you burn all over to read what he said
about a lynching. But Sandy did not mention Booker Washington
again to Tempy, although, months later, at the library
he read his book called <span class='it'>Up from Slavery</span>, and he was sure that
Aunt Hager hadn’t been wrong. “I guess they are both great
men,” he thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy’s range of reading increased, too, when his aunt
found a job for him that winter in Mr. Prentiss’s gift-card
and printing-shop, where he kept the place clean and acted
as delivery boy. This shop kept a shelf of current novels and
some volumes of the new poetry—Sandburg, Lindsay, Masters—which
the Young Women’s Club of Stanton was then
studying, to the shocked horror of the older white ladies of
the town. Sandy knew of this because Mr. Prentiss’s daughter,
a student at Goucher College, used to keep shop and
she pointed out volumes for the boy to read and told him
who their authors were and what the books meant. She said
that none of the colored boys they had employed before had
ever been interested in reading; so she often lent him, by
way of encouragement, shopworn copies to be taken home
at night and returned the next day. Thus Sandy spent much
of his first year with Tempy deep in novels too mature for a
fourteen-year-old boy. But Tempy was very proud of her
studious young nephew. She began to decide that she had
made no mistake in keeping him with her, and when he entered
the high school, she bought him his first long-trouser
suit as a spur towards further application.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy became taller week by week, and it seemed to
Tempy as if his shirt-sleeves became too short for him
overnight. His voice was changing, too, and he had acquired
a liking for football, but his after-school job at Prentiss’s
kept him from playing much. At night he read, or sometimes
went to the movies with Buster—but Tempy kept him
home as much as she could. Occasionally he saw Willie-Mae,
who was keeping company with the second cook at
Wright’s Hotel. And sometimes he saw Jimmy Lane, who
was a bell-hop now and hung out with a sporty crowd in the
rear room of Cudge Windsor’s pool hall. But whenever
Sandy went into his old neighborhood, he felt sad, remembering
Aunt Hager and his mother, and Jimboy, and Harriett—for
his young aunt had gone away from Stanton, too,
and the last he heard about her rumored that she was on the
stage in Kansas City. Now the little house where Sandy had
lived with his grandmother belonged to Tempy, who kept it
rented to a family of strangers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In high school Sandy was taking, at his aunt’s request, the
classical course, which included Latin, ancient history, and
English, and which required a great deal of reading. His
teacher of English was a large, masculine woman named
Martha Fry, who had once been to Europe and who loved to
talk about the splendors of old England and to read aloud in
a deep, mannish kind of voice, dramatizing the printed
words. It was from her that Sandy received an introduction
to Shakespeare, for in the spring term they studied <span class='it'>The
Merchant of Venice</span>. In the spring also, under Miss Fry’s direction,
the first-year students were required to write an essay
for the freshman essay prizes of both money and
medals. And in this contest Sandy won the second prize. It
was the first time in the history of the school that a colored
pupil had ever done anything of the sort, and Tempy was
greatly elated. There was a note in the papers about it, and
Sandy brought his five dollars home for his aunt to put
away. But he gave his bronze medal to a girl named Pansetta
Young, who was his class-mate and a new-found friend.</p>

<p class='pindent'>From the first moment in school that he saw Pansetta, he
knew that he liked her, and he would sit looking at her for
hours in every class that they had together—for she was a
little baby-doll kind of girl, with big black eyes and a
smooth pinkish-brown skin, and her hair was curly on top
of her head. Her widowed mother was a cook at the
Goucher College dining-hall; and she was an all-alone little
girl, for Pansetta had no brothers or sisters. After Thanksgiving
Sandy began to walk part of the way home with her
every day. He could not accompany her all the way because
he had to go to work at Mr. Prentiss’s shop. But on Christmas
he bought her a box of candy—and sent it to her by
mail. And at Easter-time she gave him a chocolate egg.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Unh-huh! You got a girl now, ain’t you?” teased Buster
one April afternoon when he caught Sandy standing in
front of the high school waiting for Pansetta to come out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, go chase yourself!” said Sandy, for Buster had a way
of talking dirty about girls, and Sandy was afraid he would
begin that with Pansetta; but today his friend changed the
subject instead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Say come on round to the pool hall tonight and I’ll
teach you to play billiards.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t think I’d better, Bus. Aunt Tempy might get sore,”
Sandy replied, shaking his head. “Besides, I have to study.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are you gonna read yourself to death?” Buster demanded
indignantly. “You’ve got to come out some time,
man! Tell her you’re going to the movies and we’ll go down
to Cudge’s instead.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy thought for a moment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All the boys come round there at night.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I might.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Little apron-string boy!” teased Buster.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I hit you a couple of times, you’ll find out I’m not!”
Sandy doubled up his fists in pretended anger. “I’ll black
your blues eyes for you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ya-a-a-a!” yelled his friend, running up the street. “See
you tonight at Cudge’s—apron-string boy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And that evening Sandy didn’t finish reading, as he had
planned, <span class='it'>Moby Dick</span>, which Mr. Prentiss’s daughter had lent
him. Instead he practised handling a cue-stick under the
tutelage of Buster.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap25'>CHAPTER XXV</h1></div>

<h3>Pool Hall</h3>

<p class='pindent'>There were no community houses in Stanton and no recreation
centers for young men except the Y.M.C.A., which
was closed to you if you were not a white boy; so, for the
Negro youths of the town, Cudge Windsor’s pool hall was
the evening meeting-place. There one could play billiards,
shoot dice in a back room, or sit in summer on the two long
benches outside, talking and looking at the girls as they
passed. In good weather these benches were crowded all the
time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Next door to the pool hall was Cudge Windsor’s lunch-room.
Of course, the best colored people did not patronize
Cudge’s, even though his business was not in the Bottoms.
It was located on Pearl Street, some three or four blocks before
that thoroughfare plunged across the tracks into the
low terrain of tinkling pianos and ladies who loved for cash.
But since Cudge catered to what Mr. Siles called “the common
element,” the best people stayed away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After months of bookishness and subjection to Tempy’s
prim plans for his improvement, Sandy found the pool hall
an easy and amusing place in which to pass time. It was better
than the movies, where people on the screen were only
shadows. And it was much better than the Episcopal
Church, with its stoop-shouldered rector, for here at
Cudge’s everybody was alive, and the girls who passed in
front swinging their arms and grinning at the men were
warm-bodied and gay, while the boys rolling dice in the rear
room or playing pool at the tables were loud-mouthed and
careless. Life sat easily on their muscular shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Adventurers and vagabonds who passed through Stanton
on the main line would often drop in at Cudge’s to play a
game or get a bite to eat, and many times on summer nights
reckless black boys, a long way from home, kept the natives
entertained with tales of the road, or trips on side-door
Pullmans, and of far-off cities where things were easy and
women generous. They had a song that went:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>O, the gals in Texas,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>They never be’s unkind.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>They feeds their men an’</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Buys ’em gin an’ wine.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>But these women in Stanton,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Their hearts is hard an’ cold.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>When you’s out of a job, they</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Denies you jelly roll.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Then, often, arguments would begin—boastings, proving
and fending; or telling of exploits with guns, knives, and
razors, with cops and detectives, with evil women and
wicked men; out-bragging and out-lying one another, all
talking at once. Sometimes they would create a racket that
could be heard for blocks. To the uninitiated it would seem
that a fight was imminent. But underneath, all was good-natured
and friendly—and through and above everything
went laughter. No matter how belligerent or lewd their talk
was, or how sordid the tales they told—of dangerous pleasures
and strange perversities—these black men laughed.
That must be the reason, thought Sandy, why poverty-stricken
old Negroes like Uncle Dan Givens lived so long—because
to them, no matter how hard life might be, it was
not without laughter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Uncle Dan was the world’s champion liar, Cudge Windsor
said, and the jolly old man’s unending flow of fabulous
reminiscences were entertaining enough to earn him a frequent
meal in Cudge’s lunch-room or a drink of licker from
the patrons of the pool hall, who liked to start the old fellow
talking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One August evening when Tempy was away attending a
convention of the Midwest Colored Women’s Clubs, Sandy
and Buster, Uncle Dan, Jimmy Lane, and Jap Logan sat until
late with a big group of youngsters in front of the pool
hall watching the girls go by. A particularly pretty high yellow
damsel passed in a thin cool dress of flowered voile,
trailing the sweetness of powder and perfume behind her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dog-gone my soul!” yelled Jimmy Lane. “Just gimme a
bone and lemme be your dog—I mean your salty dog!” But
the girl, pretending not to hear, strolled leisurely on, followed
by a train of compliments from the pool-hall
benches.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sweet mama Venus!” cried a tall raw-bony boy, gazing
after her longingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If angels come like that, lemme go to heaven—and if
they don’t, lemme be lost to glory!” Jap exclaimed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shut up, Jap! What you know ’bout women?” asked Uncle
Dan, leaning forward on his cane to interrupt the comments.
“Here you-all is, ain’t knee-high to ducks yit, an’
talkin’ ’bout womens! Shut up, all o’ you! Nary one o’ you’s
past sebenteen, but when I were yo’ age—Hee! Hee! You-all
want to know what dey called me when I were yo’ age?” The
old man warmed to his tale. “Dey called me de ‘stud nigger’!
Yes, dey did! On ’count o’ de kind o’ slavery-time work I
was doin’—I were breedin’ babies fo’ to sell!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Another lie!” said Jap.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, ’tain’t, boy! You listen here to what I’s gwine tell
you. I were de onliest real healthy nigger buck ma white
folks had on de plantation, an’ dese was ole po’ white folks
what can’t ’ford to buy many slaves, so dey figures to raise a
heap o’ darky babies an’ sell ’em later on—dat’s why dey
made me de breeder.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Hee! Hee! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ I sho breeded a
gang o’ pickaninnies, too! But I were young then, jest like
you-all is, an’ I ain’t had a pint o’ sense—laying wid de
womens all night, ever’ night.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, we believe you,” drawled Jimmy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An’ it warn’t no time befo’ little yaller chillens an’ black
chillens an’ red chillens an’ all kinds o’ chillens was runnin’
round de yard eatin’ out o’ de hog-pen an’ a-callin’ me
pappy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ here I is today gwine on ninety-three year
ole an’ I done outlived ’em all. Dat is, I done outlived all I
ever were able to keep track on after de war, ’cause we darkies
sho scattered once we was free! Yes, sah! But befo’ de
fightin’ ended I done been pappy to forty-nine chillens—an’
thirty-three of ’em were boys!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, I know you’re lying now, Uncle Dan,” Jimmy
laughed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, I ain’t, sah! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Hee! Hee! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I were a great one
when I were young! Yes, sah!” The old man went on undaunted.
“I went an’ snuck off to a dance one night, me an’
nudder boy, went ’way ovah in Macon County at ole man
Laird’s plantation, who been a bitter enemy to our white
folks. Did I ever tell you ’bout it? We took one o’ ole massa’s
best hosses out de barn to ride, after he done gone to his
bed.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, sah! It were late when we got started, an’ we
rid dat hoss lickety-split uphill an’ down holler, ovah de
crick an’ past de mill, me an’ ma buddy both on his back,
through de cane-brake an’ up anudder hill, till he wobble
an’ foam at de mouth like he’s ’bout to drap. When we git to
de dance, long ’bout midnight, we jump off dis hoss an’ ties
him to a post an’ goes in de cabin whar de music were—an’
de function were gwine on big. Man! We grabs ourselves a
gal an’ dance till de moon riz, kickin’ up our heels an’ callin’
figgers, an’ jest havin’ a scrumptious time. Ay, Lawd! We
sho did dance! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, come ’long ’bout two o’clock in de
mawnin’, niggers all leavin’, an’ we goes out in de yard to git
on dis hoss what we had left standin’ at de post.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’
Lawd have mercy—de hoss were dead! Yes, sah! He done
fell down right whar he were tied, eyeballs rolled back,
mouth a-foamin’, an’ were stone-dead! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, we ain’t
knowed how we gwine git home ner what we gwine do ’bout
massa’s hoss—an’ we was skeered, Lawdy! ’Cause we know
he beat us to death if he find out we done rid his best hoss
anyhow—let lone ridin’ de crittur to death.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An’ all de
low-down Macon niggers what was at de party was whaw-whawin’
fit to kill, laughin’ ’cause it were so funny to see us
gittin’ ready to git on our hoss an’ de hoss were dead! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Well, sah, me an’ ma buddy ain’t wasted no time. We took
dat animule up by de hind legs an’ we drug him all de way
home to massa’s plantation befo’ day! We sho did! Uphill
an’ down holler, sixteen miles! Yes, sah! An’ put dat damn
hoss back in massa’s barn like he war befo’ we left. An’ when
de sun riz, me an’ ma buddy were in de slavery quarters
sleepin’ sweet an’ lowly-like as if we ain’t been nowhar.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
De next day old massa ’maze how dat hoss die all tied up in
his stall wid his halter on! An’ we niggers ’maze, too, when
we heard dat massa’s hoss been dead, ’cause we ain’t knowed
a thing ’bout it. No, sah! Ain’t none o’ us niggers knowed a
thing! Hee! Hee! Not a thing!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Weren’t you scared?” asked Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sho, we was scared,” said Uncle Dan, “but we ain’t act
like it. Niggers was smart in them days.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’re still smart,” said Jap Logan, “if they can lie like
you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I mean!” said Buster.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Uncle Dan’s the world’s champeen liar,” drawled a tall
lanky boy. “Come on, let’s chip in and buy him a sandwich,
’cause he’s lied enough fo’ one evening.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They soon crowded into the lunch-room and sat on
stools at the counter ordering soda or ice-cream from the
fat good-natured waitress. While they were eating, a gambler
bolted in from the back room of the pool hall with a
handful of coins he had just won.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gonna feed ma belly while I got it in ma hand,” he
shouted. “Can’t tell when I might lose, ’cause de dice is runnin’
they own way tonight. Say, Mattie,” he yelled, “tell chef
to gimme a beefsteak all beat up like Jim Jeffries, cup o’ coffee
strong as Jack Johnson, an’ come flyin’ like a airship so I
can get back in the game. Tell that kitchen buggar sweet-papa
Stingaree’s out here!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, keep yo’ collar on,” said Mattie. “De steak’s got
to be cooked.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What you want, Uncle Dan?” yelled the gambler to the
old man. “While I’s winnin’, might as well feed you, too.
Take some ham and cabbage or something. That sandwich
ain’t ’nough to fill you up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Uncle Dan accepted a plate of spareribs, and Stingaree
threw down a pile of nickels on the counter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Injuns an’ buffaloes,” he said loudly. “Two things de
white folks done killed, so they puts ’em on de backs o’
nickels.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Rush up that steak there, gal, I’s hongry!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy finished his drink and bought a copy of the <span class='it'>Chicago
Defender</span>, the World’s Greatest Negro Weekly, which was
sold at the counter. Across the front in big red letters there
was a headline: <span class='it'>Negro Boy Lynched</span>. There was also an account
of a race riot in a Northern industrial city. On the theatrical
page a picture of pretty Baby Alice Whitman, the tap-dancer,
attracted his attention, and he read a few of the items
there concerning colored shows; but as he was about to turn
the page, a little article in the bottom corner made him
pause and put the paper down on the counter.</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='line' style='text-align:center;'>ACTRESS MAKES HIT</p>

<p class='noindent'>St. Louis, Mo., Aug. 3: Harrietta Williams, sensational
young blues-singer, has been packing the Booker Washington
Theatre to the doors here this week. Jones and Jones are
the headliners for the all-colored vaudeville bill, but the
singing of Miss Williams has been the outstanding drawing
card. She is being held over for a continued engagement,
with Billy Sanderlee at the piano.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>“Billy Sanderlee,” said Buster, who was looking over
Sandy’s shoulder. “That’s that freckled-faced yellow guy
who used to play for dances around here, isn’t it? He could
really beat a piano to death, all right!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure could,” replied Sandy. “Gee, they must make a
great team together, ’cause my Aunt Harrie can certainly
sing and dance!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ain’t the only thing she can do!” bellowed the gambler,
swallowing a huge chunk of steak. “Yo’ Aunt Harrie’s a
whang, son!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shut yo’ mouth!” said Uncle Dan.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap26'>CHAPTER XXVI</h1></div>

<h3>The Doors of Life</h3>

<p class='pindent'>During Sandy’s second year at high school Tempy was busy
sewing for the local Red Cross and organizing Liberty
Bond clubs among the colored population of Stanton. She
earnestly believed that the world would really become safe
for democracy, even in America, when the war ended, and
that colored folks would no longer be snubbed in private
and discriminated against in public.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Colored boys are over there fighting,” she said. “Our
men are buying hundreds of dollars’ worth of bonds, colored
women are aiding the Red Cross, our clubs are sending
boxes to the camps and to the front. White folks will see
that the Negro can be trusted in war as well as peace. Times
will be better after this for all of us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>One day a letter came from Annjee, who had moved to
Chicago. She said that Sandy’s father had not long remained
in camp, but had been sent to France almost immediately
after he enlisted, and she didn’t know what she was
going to do, she was so worried and alone! There had been
but one letter from Jimboy since he left. And now she
needed Sandy with her, but she wasn’t able to send for him
yet. She said she hoped and prayed that nothing would happen
to his father at the front, but every day there were colored
soldiers’ names on the casualty list.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good thing he’s gone,” grunted Tempy when she read
the letter as they were seated at the supper-table. Then,
suddenly changing the subject, she asked Sandy: “Did you
see Dr. Frank Crane’s beautiful article this morning?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, I didn’t,” said the boy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You certainly don’t read as much as you did last winter,”
complained his aunt. “And you’re staying out entirely too
late to suit me. I’m quite sure you’re not at the movies all
that time, either. I want these late hours stopped, young
man. Every night in the week out somewhere until ten and
eleven o’clock!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, boys do have to get around a little, Tempy,” Mr.
Siles objected. “It’s not like when you and I were coming
up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m raising this boy, Mr. Siles,” Tempy snapped. “When
do you study, James? That’s what I want to know.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When I come in,” said Sandy, which was true. His light
was on until after twelve almost every night. And when he
did not study late, his old habit of lying awake clung to him
and he could not go to sleep early.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You think too much,” Buster once said. “Stop being so
smart; then you’ll sleep better.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yep,” added Jimmy Lane. “Better be healthy and dumb
than smart and sick like some o’ these college darkies I see
with goggles on their eyes and breath smellin’ bad.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, I’m not sick,” objected Sandy, “but I just get to thinking
about things at night—the war, and white folks, and
God, and girls, and—O, I don’t know—everything in general.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure, keep on thinking,” jeered Buster, “and turn right
ashy after while and be all stoop-shouldered like Father
Hill.” (The Episcopalian rector was said to be the smartest
colored man in town.) “But I’m not gonna worry about being
smart myself. A few more years, boy, and I’ll be in some
big town passing for white, making money, and getting
along swell. And I won’t need to be smart, either—I’ll be
ofay! So if you see me some time in St. Louis or Chi with a
little blond on my arm—don’t recognize me, hear! I want
my kids to be so yellow-headed they won’t have to think
about a color line.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And Sandy knew that Buster meant what he said, for his
light-skinned friend was one of those people who always go
directly towards the things they want, as though the road is
straight before them and they can see clearly all the way.
But to Sandy himself nothing ever seemed quite that clear.
Why was his country going stupidly to war? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Why were
white people and colored people so far apart? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Why was
it wrong to desire the bodies of women? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. With his mind
a maelstrom of thoughts as he lay in bed night after night
unable to go to sleep quickly, Sandy wondered many things
and asked himself many questions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sometimes he would think about Pansetta Young, his
class-mate with the soft brown skin, and the pointed and
delicate breasts of her doll-like body. He had never been
alone with Pansetta, never even kissed her, yet she was “his
girl” and he liked her a great deal. Maybe he loved
her! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But what did it mean to love a girl? Were you supposed
to marry her then and live with her for ever? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. His
father had married his mother—good-natured, guitar-playing
Jimboy—but they weren’t always together, and Sandy
knew that Jimboy was enjoying the war now, just as he had
always enjoyed everything else.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee, he must of married early to be my father and still
look so young!” he thought. “Suppose I marry Pansetta
now!” But what did he really know about marriage other
than the dirty fragments he had picked up from Jimmy and
Buster and the fellows at the pool hall?</p>

<p class='pindent'>On his fifteenth birthday Tempy had given him a book
written for young men on the subject of love and living,
called <span class='it'>The Doors of Life</span>, addressed to all Christian youths in
their teens—but it had been written by a white New England
minister of the Presbyterian faith who stood aghast before
the flesh; so its advice consisted almost entirely in how
to pray in the orthodox manner, and in how <span class='it'>not</span> to love.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Avoid evil companions lest they be your undoing (see
Psalms cxix, 115-20); and beware of lewd women, for their
footsteps lead down to hell (see Proverbs vii, 25-7),” said the
book, and that was the extent of its instructions on sex, except
that it urged everyone to marry early and settle down
to a healthy, moral, Christian life.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But how could you
marry early when you had no money and no home to which
to take a wife? Sandy wondered. And who were evil companions?
Neither Aunt Hager nor Annjee had ever said anything
to Sandy about love in its bodily sense; Jimboy had
gone away too soon to talk with him; and Tempy and her
husband were too proper to discuss such subjects; so the
boy’s sex knowledge consisted only in the distorted ideas
that youngsters whisper; the dirty stories heard in the hotel
lobby where he had worked; and the fact that they sold in
drugstores articles that weren’t mentioned in the company
of nice people.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But who were nice people anyway? Sandy hated the word
“nice.” His Aunt Tempy was always using it. All of her
friends were nice, she said, respectable and refined. They
went around with their noses in the air and they didn’t
speak to porters and wash-women—though they weren’t
nearly so much fun as the folks they tried to scorn. Sandy
liked Cudge Windsor or Jap Logan better than he did Dr.
Mitchell, who had been to college—and never forgotten it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy wondered if Booker T. Washington had been like
Tempy’s friends? Or if Dr. Du Bois was a snob just because
he was a college man? He wondered if those two men had a
good time being great. Booker T. was dead, but he had left a
living school in the South. Maybe he could teach in the
South, too, Sandy thought, if he ever learned enough. Did
colored folks need to know the things he was studying in
books now? Did French and Latin and Shakespeare make
people wise and happy? Jap Logan never went beyond the
seventh grade and he was happy. And Jimboy never attended
school much either. Maybe school didn’t matter. Yet to get a
good job you had to be smart—and white, too. That was the
trouble, you had to be white!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But I want to learn!” thought Sandy as he lay awake in
the dark after he had gone to bed at night. “I want to go to
college. I want to go to Europe and study.” “Work and make
ready and maybe your chance will come,” it said under the
picture of Lincoln on the calendar given away by the First
National Bank, where Earl, his white friend, already had a
job promised him when he came out of school.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It was
not nearly so difficult for white boys. They could work at
anything—in stores, on newspapers, in offices. They could
become president of the United States if they were clever
enough. But a colored boy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. No wonder Buster was going
to pass for white when he left Stanton.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t blame him,” thought Sandy. “Sometimes I hate
white people, too, like Aunt Harrie used to say she did. Still,
some of them are pretty decent—my English-teacher, and
Mr. Prentiss where I work. Yet even Mr. Prentiss wouldn’t
give me a job clerking in his shop. All I can do there is run
errands and scrub the floor when everybody else is gone.
There’s no advancement for colored fellows. If they start as
porters, they stay porters for ever and they can’t come up.
Being colored is like being born in the basement of life,
with the door to the light locked and barred—and the white
folks live upstairs. They don’t want us up there with them,
even when we’re respectable like Dr. Mitchell, or smart like
Dr. Du Bois.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And guys like Jap Logan—well, Jap don’t
care anyway! Maybe it’s best not to care, and stay poor and
meek waiting for heaven like Aunt Hager did.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I
don’t want heaven! I want to live first!” Sandy thought. “I
want to live!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He understood then why many old Negroes said: “Take all
this world and give me Jesus!” It was because they couldn’t
get this world anyway—it belonged to the white folks. They
alone had the power to give or withhold at their back doors.
Always back doors—even for Tempy and Dr. Mitchell if they
chose to go into Wright’s Hotel or the New Albert Restaurant.
And no door at all for Negroes if they wanted to attend
the Rialto Theatre, or join the Stanton Y.M.C.A., or work behind
the grilling at the National Bank.</p>

<p class='pindent'><span class='it'>The Doors of Life</span>.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God damn that simple-minded
book that Tempy had given him! What did an old white
minister know about the doors of life for him and Pansetta
and Jimmy Lane, for Willie-Mae and Buster and Jap Logan
and all the black and brown and yellow youngsters
standing on the threshold of the great beginning in a
Western town called Stanton? What did an old white minister
know about the doors of life anywhere? And, least of
all, the doors to a Negro’s life? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Black youth.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Dark
hands knocking, knocking! Pansetta’s little brown hands
knocking on the doors of life! Baby-doll hands, tiny autumn-leaf
girl-hands! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Gee, Pansetta! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The Doors of
Life .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the great big doors.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy was asleep .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. of
life.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap27'>CHAPTER XXVII</h1></div>

<h3>Beware of Women</h3>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t permit it,” said Tempy. “I won’t stand for it. You’ll
have to mend your ways, young man! Spending your
evenings in Windsor’s pool parlor and running the streets
with a gang of common boys that have had no raising, that
Jimmy Lane among them. I won’t stand for it while you stay
in my house.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But that’s not the worst of it. Mr. Prentiss
tells me you’ve been getting to work late after school three
times this week. And what have you been doing? O, don’t
think I don’t know! I saw you with my own eyes yesterday
walking home with that girl Pansetta Young! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, I
want you to understand that I won’t have it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t walk home with her,” said Sandy. “I only go part
way with her every day. She’s in my class in high school and
we have to talk over our lessons. She’s the only colored kid
in my class I have to talk to.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lessons! Yes, I know it’s lessons,” said Tempy sarcastically.
“If she were a girl of our own kind, it would be all
right. I don’t see why you don’t associate more with the
young people of the church. Marie Steward or Grace
Mitchell are both nice girls and you don’t notice them. No,
you have to take up with this Pansetta, whose mother works
out all day, leaving her daughter to do as she chooses. Well,
she’s not going to ruin you, after all I’ve done to try to make
something out of you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Beware of women, son,” said Mr. Siles pontifically from
his deep morris-chair. It was one of his few evenings home
and Tempy had asked him to talk to her nephew, who had
gotten beyond her control, for Sandy no longer remained
in at night even when she expressly commanded it; and he
no longer attended church regularly, but slept on Sunday
mornings instead. He kept up his school-work, it was true,
but he seemed to have lost all interest in acquiring the respectable
bearing and attitude towards life that Tempy
thought he should have. She bought him fine clothes and he
went about with ruffians.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“In other words, he has been acting just like a nigger, Mr.
Siles!” she told her husband. “And he’s taken up with a girl
who’s not of the best, to say the least, even if she does go to
the high school. Mrs. Francis Cannon, who lives near her,
tells me that this Pansetta has boys at her house all the time,
and her mother is never at home until after dark. She’s a
cook or something somewhere.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. A fine person for a
nephew of ours to associate with, this Pansy daughter of
hers!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Pansetta’s a nice girl,” said Sandy. “And she’s smart in
school, too. She helps me get my Latin every day, and I
might fail if she didn’t.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Huh! It’s little help you need with your Latin, young
man! Bring it here and I’ll help you. I had Latin when I was
in school. And certainly you don’t need to walk on the
streets with her in order to study Latin, do you? First thing
you know you’ll be getting in trouble with her and she’ll be
having a baby—I see I have to be plain—and whether it’s
yours or not, she’ll say it is. Common girls like that always
want to marry a boy they think is going to amount to something—going
to college and be somebody in the world. Besides,
you’re from the Williams family and you’re
good-looking! But I’m going to stop this affair right
now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. From now on you are to leave that girl alone, do
you understand me? She’s dangerous!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes,” grunted Mr. Siles. “She’s dangerous.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Angry and confused, Sandy left the room and went upstairs
to bed, but he could not sleep. What right had they to
talk that way about his friends? Besides, what did they mean
about her being dangerous? About his getting in trouble
with her? About her wanting to marry him because her
mother was a cook and he was going to college?</p>

<p class='pindent'>A white boy in Sandy’s high-school class had “got in trouble”
with an Italian girl and they had had to go to the juvenile
court to fix it up, but it had been kept quiet. Even now
Sandy couldn’t quite give an exact explanation of what getting
in trouble with a girl meant. Did a girl have to have a
baby just because a fellow walked home with her when he
didn’t even go in? Pansetta had asked him into her house often,
but he always had to go back uptown to work. He was
due at work at four o’clock—besides he knew it wasn’t quite
correct to call on a young lady if her mother was not at
home. But it wasn’t necessarily bad, was it? And how could a
girl have a baby and say it was his if it wasn’t his? Why
couldn’t he talk to his Aunt Tempy about such things and
get a clear and simple answer instead of being given an old
book like <span class='it'>The Doors of Life</span> that didn’t explain anything at
all?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Pansetta hadn’t said a word to him about babies, or anything
like that, but she let him kiss her once and hold her on
his lap at Sadie Butler’s Christmas party. Gee, but she could
kiss—and such a long time! He wouldn’t care if she did
make him marry her, only he wanted to travel first. If his
mother would send for him now, he would like to go to
Chicago. His Aunt Tempy was too cranky, and too proper.
She didn’t like any of his friends, and she hated the pool
hall. But where else was there for a fellow to play? Who
wanted to go to those high-toned people’s houses, like the
Mitchells’, and look bored all the time while they put
Caruso’s Italian records on their new victrola? Even if it was
the finest victrola owned by a Negro in Stanton, as they always
informed you, Sandy got tired of listening to records
in a language that none of them understood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But this is opera!” they said. Well, maybe it was, but he
thought that his father and Harriett used to sing better. And
they sang nicer songs. One of them was:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Love, O love, O careless Love—</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Goes to your head like wine!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“And maybe I really am in love with Pansetta.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But if
she thinks she can fool me into marrying her before I’ve
travelled all around the world, like my father, she’s wrong,”
Sandy thought. “She can’t trick me, not this kid!” Then he
was immediately sorry that he had allowed Tempy’s insinuations
to influence his thoughts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Pretty, baby-faced Pansetta! Why, she wouldn’t try to
trick anybody into anything. If she wanted me to love her,
she’d let me, but she wouldn’t try to trick a fellow. She
wouldn’t let me love her that way anyhow—like Tempy
meant. Gee, that was ugly of Aunt Tempy to say
that! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But Buster said she would.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Aw, he always talked
that way about girls! He said no women were any good—as
if he knew! And Jimmy Lane said white women were worse
than colored—but all the boys who worked at hotels said
that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Let ’em talk! Sandy liked Pansetta anyhow.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But
maybe his Aunt Tempy was right! Maybe he had better stop
walking home with her. He didn’t want to “get in trouble”
and not be able to travel to Chicago some time, where his
mother was. Maybe he could go to Chicago next summer if
he began to save his money now. He wanted to see the big
city, where the buildings were like towers, the trains ran
overhead, and the lake was like a sea. He didn’t want to “get
in trouble” with Pansetta even if he did like her. Besides, he
had to live with Tempy for a while yet and he hated to be
quarrelling with his aunt all the time. He’d stop going to the
pool hall so much and stay home at night and study.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But,
heck! it was too beautiful out of doors to stay in the house—especially
since spring had come!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Through his open window, as he lay in bed after Tempy’s
tirade about the girl, he could see the stars and the tops of
the budding maple-trees. A cool earth-smelling breeze
lifted the white curtains, scattering the geometry papers
that he had left lying on his study table. He got out of bed to
pick up the papers and put them away, and stood for a moment
in his pyjamas looking out of the window at the roofs
of the houses and the tops of the trees under the night sky.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish I had a brother,” Sandy thought as he stood there.
“Maybe I could talk to him about things and I wouldn’t have
to think so much. It’s no fun being the only kid in the family,
and your father never home either.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. When I get married,
I’m gonna have a lot of children; then they won’t have
to grow up by themselves.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The next day after school he walked nearly home with
Pansetta as usual, although he was still thinking of what
Tempy had said, but he hadn’t decided to obey his aunt yet.
At the corner of the block in which the girl lived, he gave
her her books.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I got to beat it back to the shop now. Old man Prentiss’ll
have a dozen deliveries waiting for me just because I’m
late.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right,” said Pansetta in her sweet little voice. “I’m
sorry you can’t come on down to my house awhile. Say, why
don’t you work at the hotel, anyway? Wouldn’t you make
more money there?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Guess I would,” replied the boy. “But my aunt thinks it’s
better where I am.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh,” said Pansetta. “Well, I saw Jimmy Lane last night
and he’s making lots of money at the hotel. He wanted to
meet me around to school this afternoon, but I told him no.
I said you took me home.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I do,” said Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes,” laughed Pansetta; “but I didn’t tell him you wouldn’t
ever come in.”</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>During the sunny spring weeks that followed, Sandy did
not walk home with her any more after school. Having to
go to work earlier was the excuse he gave, but at first
Pansetta seemed worried and puzzled. She asked him if he
was mad at her, or something, but he said he wasn’t. Then in
a short time other boys were meeting her on the corner
near the school, buying her cones when the ice-cream
wagon passed, and taking her home in the afternoons. To
see other fellows buying her ice-cream and walking home
with her made Sandy angry, but it was his own fault, he
thought. And he felt lonesome having no one to walk with
after classes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Pansetta, in school, was just as pleasant as before, but in a
kind of impersonal way, as though she hadn’t been his girl
once. And now Sandy was worried, because it had been easy
to drop her, but would it be easy to get her back again if he
should want her? The hotel boys had money, and once or
twice he saw her talking with Jimmy Lane. Gee, but she
looked pretty in her thin spring dresses and her wide straw
hat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Why had he listened to Tempy at all? She didn’t know
Pansetta, and just because her mother worked out in service
she wanted him to snub the girl. What was that to be afraid
of—her mother not being home after school? Even if
Pansetta would let him go in the house with her and put his
arms around her and love her, why shouldn’t he? Didn’t he
have a right to have a girl like that, as well as the other fellows?
Didn’t he have a right to be free with women, too, like
all the rest of the young men? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But Pansetta wasn’t that
kind of girl! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What made his mind run away with him?
Because of what Tempy had said? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. To hell with Tempy!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s just an old-fashioned darky Episcopalian, that’s
what Tempy is! And she wanted me to drop Pansetta because
her mother doesn’t belong to the Dunbar Whist
Club. Gee, but I’m ashamed of myself. I’m a cad and a snob,
that’s all I am, and I’m going to apologize.” Subconsciously
he was living over a scene from an English novel he had
read at the printing-shop, in which the Lord dropped the
Squire’s daughter for a great Lady, but later returned to his
first love. Sandy retained the words “cad” and “snob” in his
vocabulary, but he wasn’t thinking of the novel now. He really
believed, after three weeks of seeing Pansetta walking
with other boys, that he had done wrong, and that Tempy
was the villainess in the situation. It was worrying him a
great deal; he decided to make up with Pansetta if he could.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One Friday afternoon she left school with a great armful
of books. They had to write an English composition for
Monday and she had taken some volumes from the school
library for reference. He might have offered to carry them
for her, but he hadn’t. Instead he went to work—and there
had been no other colored boys on the corner waiting for
her as she went out. Now he could have kicked himself for
his neglect, he thought, as he cleaned the rear room of Mr.
Prentiss’s gift-card shop. Suddenly he dropped the broom
with which he was sweeping, grabbed his cap, and left the
place, for the desire to make friends with Pansetta possessed
him more fiercely than ever, and he no longer cared
about his work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m going to see her right now,” he thought, “before I go
home to supper. Gee, but I’m ashamed of the way I’ve
treated her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>On the way to Pansetta’s house the lawns looked fresh
and green and on some of them tulips were blooming. The
late afternoon sky was aglow with sunset. Little boys were
out in the streets with marbles and tops, and little girls were
jumping rope on the sidewalks. Workmen were coming
home, empty dinner-pails in their hands, and a band of Negro
laborers passed Sandy, singing softly together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must hurry,” the boy thought. “It will soon be our supper-time.”
He ran until he was at Pansetta’s house—then
came the indecision: Should he go in? Or not go in? He was
ashamed of his treatment of her and embarrassed. Should
he go on by as if he had not meant to call? Suppose she shut
the door in his face! Or, worse, suppose she asked him to
stay awhile! Should he stay? What Tempy had said didn’t
matter any more. He wanted to be friends with Pansetta
again. He wanted her to know he still liked her and wanted
to walk home with her. But how could he say it? Had she
seen him from the window? Maybe he could turn around
and go back, and see her Monday at school.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No! I’m not a coward,” he declared. “Afraid of a girl! I’ll
walk right up on the front porch and knock!” But the small
house looked very quiet and the lace curtains were tightly
drawn together at the windows.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He knocked again.
Maybe there was no one home.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Yes, he heard somebody.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Finally Pansetta peeped through the curtains of the glass
in the front door. Then she opened the door and smiled
surprisingly, her hair mussed and her creamy-brown skin
pink from the warm blood pulsing just under the surface.
Her eyes were dark and luminous, and her lips were moist
and red.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s Sandy!” she said, turning to address someone inside
the front room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O, come in, old man,” a boy’s voice called in a tone of
forced welcome, and Sandy saw Jimmy Lane sitting on the
couch adjusting his collar self-consciously. “How’s everything,
old scout?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right,” Sandy stammered. “Say, Pansy, I—I—Do you
know—I mean, what is the subject we’re supposed to write
on for English Monday? I must of forgotten to take it
down.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, ‘A Trip to Shakespeare’s England.’ That’s easy to
remember, silly. You must have been asleep.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Won’t you
sit down?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, thanks, I’ve—I guess I got to get back to supper.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jesus!” cried Jimmy, jumping up from the sofa. “Is it that
late? I’m due on bells at six o’clock. Wait a minute, Sandy,
and I’ll walk up with you as far as the hotel. Boy, I’m behind
time!” He picked up his coat from the floor, and Pansetta
held it for him while he thrust his arms into the sleeves,
glancing around meanwhile for his cap, which lay among
the sofa-pillows. Then he kissed the girl carelessly on the
lips as he slid one arm familiarly around her waist.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So long, baby,” he said, and the two boys went out. On
the porch Jimmy lit a cigarette and passed the pack to
Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimmy Lane looked and acted as if he were much older
than his companion, but Jimmy had been out of school several
years, and hopping bells taught a fellow a great deal
more about life than books did—and also about women. Besides,
he was supporting himself now, which gave him an air
of independence that boys who still lived at home didn’t
have.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they had walked about a block, the bell-boy said
carelessly: “Pansetta can go! Can’t she, man?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know,” said Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, boy, you’re lying,” Jimmy Lane returned.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t try to hand me that kid stuff! You had her for a
year, didn’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes,” replied Sandy slowly, “but not like you mean.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stop kidding,” Jimmy insisted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, honest, I never touched her that way,” the boy said.
“I never was at her house before.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimmy opened his mouth astonished. “What!” he exclaimed,
“and her old lady out working till eight and nine
every night! Say, Sandy, we’re friends, but you’re either just
a big liar—or else a God damn fool!” He threw his cigarette
away and put both hands in his pockets. “Pansetta’s easy as
hell, man!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap28'>CHAPTER XXVIII</h1></div>

<h3>Chicago</h3>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'><span class='sc'>Chicago, Ill.</span></p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'>May 16, 1918</p>

<p class='noindent'>Dear Sandy:</p>

<p class='pindent'>Have just come home from work and am very tired but
thought I would write you this letter right now while I had
time and wasn’t sleepy. You are a big boy and I think you can
be of some help to me. I don’t want you to stay in Stanton
any longer as a burden on your Aunt Tempy. She says in her
letters you have begun to stay out late nights and not pay
her any mind. You ought to be with your mother now because
you are all she has since I do not know what has happened
to your father in France. The war is awful and so
many mens are getting killed. Have not had no word from
Jimboy for 7 months from Over There and am worried till
I’m sick. Will try and send you how much money you need
for your fare before the end of the month so when school is
out in June you can come. Let me know how much you
saved and I will send you the rest to come to Chicago because
Mr. Harris where I stay is head elevator man at a big
hotel in the Loop and he says he can put you on there in
July. That will be a good job for you and maybe by saving
your money you can go back to school in Sept. I will help
you if I can but you will have to help me too because I have
not been doing so well. Am working for a colored lady in
her hair dressing parlor and am learning hairdressing myself,
shampoo and straighten and give massauges on the face
and all. But colored folks are hard people to work for.
Madam King is from down south somewhere and these
southern Negroes are not like us in their ways, but she
seems to like me. Mr. Harris is from the south too in a place
called Baton Rouge. They eat rice all the time. Well I must
close hoping to see you soon once more because it has been
five years since I have looked at my child. With love to you
and Tempy, be a good boy,</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'>Your mother,</p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:right;margin-right:0em;'><span class='sc'>Annjelica Rodgers</span>.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>A week later another letter came to Sandy from his
mother. This time it was a registered special-delivery, which
said: “If you’ll come right away you can get your job at once.
Mr. Harris says he will have a vacancy Saturday because one
of the elevator boys are quitting.” And sufficient bills to
cover Sandy’s fare tumbled out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With a tremendous creaking and grinding and steady
clacking of wheels the long train went roaring through the
night towards Chicago as Sandy, in a day coach, took from
his pocket Annjee’s two letters and re-read them for the
tenth time since leaving Stanton. He could hardly believe
himself actually at that moment on the way to Chicago!</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the stuffy coach papers littered the floor and the scent
of bananas and human feet filled the car. The lights were
dim and most of the passengers slumbered in the straight-backed
green-plush seats, but Sandy was still awake. The
thrill of his first all-night rail journey and his dream-expectations
of the great city were too much to allow a sixteen-year-old
boy to go calmly to sleep, although the man next to
him had long been snoring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee’s special-delivery letter had come that morning.
Sandy had discovered it when he came home for lunch, and
upon his return to the high school for the afternoon classes
he went at once to the principal to inquire if he might be excused
from the remaining days of the spring term.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let me see! Your record’s pretty good, isn’t it,
Rodgers?” said Professor Perkins looking over his glasses at
the young colored fellow standing before him. “Going to
Chicago, heh? Well, I guess we can let you transfer and
give you full credit for this year’s work without your waiting
here for the examinations—there are only ten days or
so of the term remaining. You are an honor student and
would get through your exams all right. Now, if you’ll just
send us your address when you get to Chicago, we’ll see
that you get your report.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Intending to go to school
there, are you? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. That’s right! I like to see your people
get ahead.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, good luck to you, James.” The old gentleman
rose and held out his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good old scout,” thought Sandy. “Miss Fry was a good
teacher, too! Some white folks <span class='it'>are</span> nice all right! Not all of
them are mean.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Gee, old man Prentiss hated to see me
quit his place. Said I was the best boy he ever had working
there, even if I was late once in a while. But I don’t mind
leaving Stanton. Gee, Chicago ought to be great! And I’m
sure glad to get away from Tempy’s house. She’s too tight!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Tempy had not been glad to see her nephew leave.
She had grown fond of the boy in spite of her almost nightly
lectures to him recently on his behavior and in spite of his
never having become her model youth. Not that he was bad,
but he might have been so much better! She wanted to show
her white neighbors a perfect colored boy—and such a boy
certainly wouldn’t be a user of slang, a lover of pool halls
and non-Episcopalian ways. Tempy had given Sandy every
opportunity to move in the best colored society and he had
not taken advantage of it. Nevertheless, she cried a little as
she packed a lunch for him to eat on the train. She had done
all she could. He was a good-looking boy, and quite smart.
Now, if he wanted to go to his mother, well—“I can only
hope Chicago won’t ruin you,” she said. “It’s a wicked city!
Good-bye, James. Remember what I’ve tried to teach you.
Stand up straight and look like you’re somebody!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Stanton, Sandy’s Kansas home, was back in the darkness,
and the train sped towards the great center where all the
small-town boys in the whole Middle West wanted to go.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m going now!” thought Sandy. “Chicago now!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A few weeks past he had gone to see Sister Johnson, who
was quite feeble with the rheumatism. As she sat in the corner
of her kitchen smoking a corn-cob pipe, no longer able
to wash clothes, but still able to keep up a rapid flow of conversation,
she told him all the news.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tom, he’s still at de bank keepin’ de furnace goin’ an’
sort o’ handy man.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Willie-Mae, I ’spects you knows, is
figurin’ on gettin’ married next month to Mose Jenkins, an’
I tells her she better stay single, young as she is, but she ain’t
payin’ me no mind. Umn-unh! Jest let her go on! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Did
you heerd Sister Whiteside’s daughter done brought her
third husband home to stay wid her ma—an’ five o’ her first
husband’s chillens there too? Gals ain’t got no regard for de
old folks. Sister Whiteside say if she warn’t a Christian in
her heart, she don’t believe she could stand it! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I tells
Willie-Mae she better not bring no husbands here to stay
wid me—do an’ I’ll run him out! These mens ought be
shame o’ demselves comin’ livin’ on de women-folks.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the old woman talked, Sandy, thinking of his grandmother,
gazed out of the window towards the house next
door, where he had lived with Aunt Hager. Some small children
were playing in the back yard, running and yelling.
They belonged to the Southern family to whom Tempy had
rented the place.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Madam de Carter, who still owned the
second house, had been made a national grand officer in the
women’s division of the lodge and many of the members of
the order now had on the walls of their homes a large picture
of her dressed in full regalia, inscribed: “Yours in His
Grace,” and signed: “Madam Fannie Rosalie de Carter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Used to just plain old Rose Carter befo’ she got so important,”
said Sister Johnson, explaining her neighbor’s
lengthy name. “All these womens dey mammy named Jane
an’ Mary an’ Cora, soon’s dey gets a little somethin’, dey
changes dey names to Janette or Mariana or Corina or
somethin’ mo’ flowery then what dey had. Willie-Mae say
she gwine change her’n to Willetta-Mayola, an’ I tole her if
she do, I’ll beat her—don’t care how old she is!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy liked to listen to the rambling talk of old colored
folks. “I guess there won’t be many like that in Chicago,” he
thought, as he doubled back his long legs under the green-plush
seat of the day coach. “I better try to get to sleep—there’s
a longways to go until morning.”</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:center;'>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</p>

<p class='pindent'>Although it was not yet June, the heat was terrific when,
with the old bags that Tempy had given him, Sandy got out
of the dusty train in Chicago and walked the length of the
sheds into the station. He caught sight of his mother waiting
in the crowd, a fatter and much older woman than he
had remembered her to be; and at first she didn’t know him
among the stream of people coming from the train. Perhaps,
unconsciously, she was looking for the little boy she
left in Stanton; but Sandy was taller than Annjee now and
he looked quite a young man in his blue serge suit with long
trousers. His mother threw both plump arms around him
and hugged and kissed him for a long time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They went uptown in the street-cars, Annjee a trifle out
of breath from helping with the bags, and both of them perspiring
freely from the heat. And they were not very talkative
either. A strange and unexpected silence seemed to
come between them. Annjee had been away from her son
for five growing years and he was no longer her baby boy,
small and eager for a kiss. She could see from the little cuts
on his face that he had even begun to shave on the chin. And
his voice was like a man’s, deep and musical as Jimboy’s, but
not so sure of itself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy was not thinking of his mother as they rode
uptown on the street-car. He was looking out of the windows
at the blocks of dirty grey warehouses lining the
streets through which they were passing. He hadn’t expected
the great city to be monotonous and ugly like this
and he was vaguely disappointed. No towers, no dreams
come true! Where were the thrilling visions of grandeur he
had held? Hidden in the dusty streets? Hidden in the long,
hot alleys through which he could see at a distance the
tracks of the elevated trains?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Street-cars are slower but I ain’t got used to them air
lines yet,” said Annjee, searching her mind for something to
say. “I always think maybe them elevated cars’ll fall off o’
there sometimes. They go so fast!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I believe I’d rather ride on them, though,” said Sandy, as
he looked at the monotonous box-like tenements and dismal
alleys on the ground level. No trees, no yards, no grass
such as he had known at home, and yet, on the other hand,
no bigness or beauty about the bleak warehouses and sorry
shops that hugged the sidewalk. Soon, however, the street
began to take on a racial aspect and to become more darkly
alive. Negroes leaned from windows with heads uncombed,
or sat fanning in doorways with legs apart, talking in kimonos
and lounging in overalls, and more and more they
became a part of the passing panorama.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This is State Street,” said Annjee. “They call it the Black
Belt. We have to get off in a minute. You got your suit-case?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She rang the bell and at Thirty-seventh Street they
walked over to Wabash Avenue. The cool shade of the tiny
porch that Annjee mounted was more than welcome, and as
she took out her key to unlock the front door, Sandy sat on
the steps and mopped his forehead with a grimy handkerchief.
Inside, there was a dusky gloom in the hallway, that
smelled of hair-oil and cabbage steaming.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Guess Mis’ Harris is in the kitchen,” said Annjee.
“Come on—we’ll go upstairs and I’ll show you our room. I
guess we can both stay together till we can do better. You’re
still little enough to sleep with your mother, ain’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They went down the completely dark hall on the second
floor, and his mother opened a door that led into a rear
room with two windows looking out into the alley, giving an
extremely near view of the elevated structure on which a
downtown train suddenly rushed past with an ear-splitting
roar that made the entire house tremble and the window-sashes
rattle. There was a wash-stand with a white bowl and
pitcher in the room, Annjee’s trunk, a chair, and a brass bed,
covered with a fresh spread and starched pillow-covers in
honor of Sandy’s arrival.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“See,” said Annjee. “There’s room enough for us both,
and we’ll be saving rent. There’s no closet, but we can drive
a few extra nails behind the door. And with the two windows
we can get plenty of air these hot nights.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s nice, mama,” Sandy said, but he had to repeat his
statement twice, because another L train thundered past so
that he couldn’t hear his own words as he uttered them. “It’s
awful nice, mama!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He took off his coat and sat down on the trunk between
the two windows. Annjee came over and kissed him, rubbing
her hand across his crinkly brown hair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, you’re a great big boy now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mama’s baby—in
long pants. And you’re handsome, just like your father!” She
had Jimboy’s picture stuck in a corner of the wash-stand—a
postcard photo in his army uniform, in which he looked
very boyish and proud, sent from the training-camp before
his company went to France. “But I got no time to be setting
here petting you, Sandy, even if you have just come. I
got to get on back to the hairdressing-parlor to make some
money.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So Annjee went to work again—as she had been off only
long enough to meet the train—and Sandy lay down on the
bed and slept the hot afternoon away. That evening as a
treat they had supper at a restaurant, where Annjee picked
carefully from the cheap menu so that their bill wouldn’t be
high.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But don’t think this is regular. We can’t afford it,” she
said. “I bring things home and fix them on an oil-stove in
the room and spread papers on the trunk for a table. A
restaurant supper’s just in honor of you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they came back to the house that evening, Sandy
was introduced to Mrs. Harris, their landlady, and to her
husband, the elevator-starter, who was to give him the job at
the hotel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s a fine-looking boy you got there, Mis’ Rodgers,”
he said, appraising Sandy. “He’ll do pretty well for one of
them main lobby cars, since we don’t use nothing but first-class
intelligent help down where I am, like I told you. And
we has only the best class o’ white folks stoppin’ there,
too.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Be up at six in the mornin’, buddy, and I’ll take you
downtown with me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee was tired, so they went upstairs to the back room
and lit the gas over the bed, but the frequent roar of the L
trains prevented steady conversation and made Sandy jump
each time that the long chain of cars thundered by. He hadn’t
yet become accustomed to them, or to the vast humming of
the city, which was strange to his small-town ears. And he
wanted to go out and look around a bit, to walk up and down
the streets at night and see what they were like.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, go on if you want to,” said his mother, “but don’t
forget this house number. I’m gonna lie down, but I guess
I’ll be awake when you come back. Or somebody’ll be setting
on the porch and the door’ll be open.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At the corner Sandy stopped and looked around to be
sure of his bearings when he returned. He marked in his
mind the sign-board advertising <span class='sc'>Chesterfields</span> and the
frame-house with the tumbledown stairs on the outside. In
the street some kids were playing hopscotch under the arc-light.
Somebody stopped beside him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nice evening?” said a small yellow man with a womanish
kind of voice, smiling at Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes,” said the boy, starting across the street, but the
stranger followed him, offering Pall Malls. He smelled of
perfume, and his face looked as though it had been powdered
with white talcum as he lit a tiny pocket-lighter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stranger?” murmured the soft voice, lighting Sandy’s
cigarette.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m from Stanton,” he replied, wishing the man had not
chosen to walk with him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ah, Kentucky,” exclaimed the perfumed fellow. “I been
down there. Nice women in that town, heh?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But it’s not Kentucky,” Sandy objected. “It’s Kansas.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, out west where the girls are raring to go! I know!
Just like wild horses out there—so passionate, aren’t they?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I guess so,” Sandy ventured. The powdered voice was
softly persistent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Say, kid,” it whispered smoothly, touching the boy’s arm,
“listen, I got some swell French pictures up in my room—naked
women and everything! Want to come up and see
them?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” said Sandy, quickening his pace. “I got to go somewhere.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But I room right around the corner,” the voice insisted.
“Come on by. You’re a nice kid, you know it? Listen, don’t
walk so fast. Stop, let me talk to you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Sandy was beginning to understand. A warm sweat
broke out on his neck and forehead. Sometimes, at the pool
hall in Stanton, he had heard the men talk about queer fellows
who stopped boys in the streets and tried to coax them
to their rooms.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He thinks I’m dumb,” thought Sandy, “but I’m wise to
him!” Yet he wondered what such men did with the boys
who accompanied them. Curious, he’d like to find out—but
he was afraid; so at the next corner he turned and started
rapidly towards State Street, but the queer fellow kept close
beside him, begging.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and we’ll have a nice time.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I got wine in the
room, if you want some, and a vic, too.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Get away, will you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had reached State Street where the lights were
bright and people were passing all the time. Sandy could see
the fellow’s anxious face quite clearly now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Listen, kid .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But suddenly the man was no longer beside him—for
Sandy commenced to run. On the brightly lighted avenue
panic seized him. He had to escape this powdered face at his
shoulder. The whining voice made him sick inside—and, almost
without knowing it, his legs began swerving swiftly
between the crowds along the curb. When he stopped in
front of the Monogram Theatre, two blocks away, he was
freed of his companion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee, that’s nice,” panted Sandy, grinning as he stood
looking at the pictures in front of the vaudeville house,
while hundreds of dark people passed up and down on the
sidewalk behind him. Lots of folks were going into the theatre,
laughing and pushing, for one of the great blues-singing
Smiths was appearing there. Sandy walked towards
the ticket-booth to see what the prices were.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Buy me a ticket, will you?” said a feminine voice beside
him. This time it was a girl—a very ugly, skinny girl, whose
smile revealed a row of dirty teeth. She sidled up to the startled
boy whom she had accosted and took his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not going in,” Sandy said shortly, as he backed away,
wiping the palm of his hand on his coat-sleeve.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right then, stingy!” hissed the girl, flouncing her hips
and digging into her own purse for the coins to buy a ticket.
“I got money.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Some men standing on the edge of the sidewalk laughed
as Sandy went up the street. A little black child in front of
him toddled along in the crowd, seemingly by itself, licking
a big chocolate ice-cream cone that dripped down the front
of its dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So this was Chicago where the buildings were like towers
and the lake was like a sea .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. State Street, the greatest Negro
street in the world, where people were always happy,
lights for ever bright; and where the prettiest brown-skin
women on earth could be found—so the men in Stanton
said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I guess I didn’t walk the right way. But maybe tomorrow
I’ll see other things,” Sandy thought, “the Loop and the lake
and the museum and the library. Maybe they’ll be better.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned into a side street going back towards Wabash
Avenue. It was darker there, and near the alley a painted
woman called him, stepping out from among the shadows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Say, baby, com’ere!” But the boy went on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Crossing overhead an L train thundered by, flashing its
flow of yellow light on the pavement beneath.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy turned into Wabash Avenue and cut across the
street. As he approached the colored Y.M.C.A., three boys
came out with swimming suits on their arms, and one of
them said: “Damn, but it’s hot!” They went up the street
laughing and talking with friendly voices, and at the corner
they turned off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must be nearly home,” Sandy thought, as he made out
a group of kids still playing under the street-light. Then he
distinguished, among the other shabby buildings, the brick
house where he lived. The front porch was still crowded
with roomers trying to keep cool, and as the boy came up to
the foot of the steps, some of the fellows seated there moved
to let him pass.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-evenin’, Mr. Rodgers,” Mrs. Harris called, and as
Sandy had never been called Mr. Rodgers before, it made
him feel very manly and a little embarrassed as he threaded
his way through the group on the porch.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Upstairs he found his mother sleeping deeply on one side
of the bed. He undressed, keeping on his underwear, and
crawled in on the other side, but he lay awake a long while
because it was suffocatingly hot, and very close in their
room. The bed-bugs bit him on the legs. Every time he got
half asleep, an L train roared by, shrieking outside their
open windows, lighting up the room, and shaking the whole
house. Each time the train came, he started and trembled as
though a sudden dragon were rushing at the bed. But then,
after midnight, when the elevated cars passed less frequently,
and he became more used to their passing, he went
to sleep.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap29'>CHAPTER XXIX</h1></div>

<h3>Elevator</h3>

<p class='pindent'>The following day Sandy went to work as elevator-boy at
the hotel in the Loop where Mr. Harris was head bellman,
and during the hot summer months that followed, his life in
Chicago gradually settled into a groove of work and
home—work, and home to Annjee’s stuffy little room
against the elevated tracks, where at night his mother read
the war news and cried because there had been no letter
from Jimboy. Whether Sandy’s father was in Brest or Saint-Nazaire
with the labor battalions, or at the front, she did
not know. The <span class='it'>Chicago Defender</span> said that colored troops
were fighting in the Champagne sector with great distinction,
but Annjee cried anew when she read that.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No news is good news,” Sandy repeated every night to
comfort his mother, for he couldn’t imagine Jimboy dead.
“Papa’s all right!” But Annjee worried and wept, half sick all
the time, for ever reading the death lists fearfully for her
husband’s name.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That summer the heat was unbearable. Uptown in the
Black Belt the air was like a steaming blanket around your
head. In the Loop the sky was white-hot metal. Even on the
lake front there was no relief unless you hurried into the
crowded water. And there were long stretches of beach
where the whites did not want Negroes to swim; so it was
often dangerous to bathe if you were colored.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy sweltered as he stood at the door of his box-like,
mirrored car in the big hotel lobby. He wore a red uniform
with brass buttons and a tight coat that had to be kept fastened
no matter how warm it was. But he felt very proud of
himself holding his first full-time job, helping his mother
with the room rent, and trying to save a little money out of
each pay in order to return to high school in the fall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The prospects of returning to school, however, were not
bright. Some weeks it was impossible for Sandy to save even
a half-dollar. And Annjee said now that she believed he
should stay out of school and work to take care of himself,
since he was as large as a man and had more education already
than she’d had at his age. Aunt Hager would not have
felt that way, though, Sandy thought, remembering his
grandmother’s great ambition for him. But Annjee was different,
less far-seeing than her mother had been, less full of
hopes for her son, not ambitious about him—caring only
for the war and Jimboy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At the hotel Sandy’s hours on duty were long, and his legs
and back ached with weariness from standing straight in
one spot all the time, opening and closing the bronze door
of the elevator. He had been assigned the last car in a row of
six, each manned by a colored youth standing inside his
metal box in a red uniform, operating the lever that sent the
car up from the basement grill to the roof-garden restaurant
on the fifteenth floor and then back down again all day.
Repeating up-down—up-down—up-down interminably,
carrying white guests.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After two months of this there were times when Sandy
felt as though he could stand it no longer. The same flow of
people week after week—fashionable women, officers, business
men; the fetid air of the elevator-shaft, heavy with
breath and the perfume of bodies; the same doors opening
at the same unchanging levels hundreds of times each innumerable,
monotonous day. The L in the morning; the L
again at night. The street or the porch for a few minutes of
air. Then bed. And the same thing tomorrow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve got to get out of this,” Sandy thought. “It’s an awful
job.” Yet some of the fellows had been there for years. Three
of the elevator-men on Sandy’s shift were more than forty
years old—and had never gotten ahead in life. Mr. Harris
had been a bell-hop since his boyhood, doing the same
thing day after day—and now he was very proud of being
head bell-boy in Chicago.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve got to get out of this,” Sandy kept repeating. “Or
maybe I’ll get stuck here, too, like they are, and never get
away. I’ve got to go back to school.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yet he knew that his mother was making very little
money—serving more or less as an apprentice in the hairdressing-shop,
trying to learn the trade. And if he quit
work, how would he live? Annjee did not favor his returning
to school. And could he study if he were hungry? Could he
study if he were worried about having no money? Worried
about Annjee’s displeasure?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes! I can!” he said. “I’m going to study!” He thought
about Booker Washington sleeping under the wooden
pavements at Richmond—because he had had no place to
stay on his way to Hampton in search of an education. He
thought about Frederick Douglass—a fugitive slave, owning
not even himself, and yet a student. “If they could study, I
can, too! When school opens, I’m going to quit this job.
Maybe I can get another one at night or in the late afternoon—but
it doesn’t matter—I’m going back to my classes
in September.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m through with elevators.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy! Jimboy! Like Jimboy! something inside him
warned, quitting work with no money, uncaring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not like Jimboy,” Sandy countered against himself.
“Not like my father, always wanting to go somewhere. I’d
get as tired of travelling all the time as I do of running this
elevator up and down day after day.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m more like Harriett—not
wanting to be a servant at the mercies of white
people for ever.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I want to do something for myself, by
myself.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Free.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I want a house to live in, too, when I’m
older—like Tempy’s and Mr. Siles’s.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I wouldn’t want
to be like Tempy’s friends—or her husband, dull and colorless,
putting all his money away in a white bank, ashamed of
colored people.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A lot of minstrels—that’s all niggers are!” Mr. Siles had
said once. “Clowns, jazzers, just a band of dancers—that’s
why they never have anything. Never be anything but servants
to the white people.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Clowns! Jazzers! Band of dancers! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Harriett! Jimboy!
Aunt Hager! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. A band of dancers! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Sandy remembered
his grandmother whirling around in front of the altar at revival
meetings in the midst of the other sisters, her face
shining with light, arms outstretched as though all the cares
of the world had been cast away; Harriett in the back yard
under the apple-tree, eagle-rocking in the summer
evenings to the tunes of the guitar; Jimboy singing.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But
was that why Negroes were poor, because they were
dancers, jazzers, clowns? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The other way round would
be better: dancers because of their poverty; singers because
they suffered; laughing all the time because they must forget.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It’s more like that, thought Sandy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A band of dancers.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Black dancers—captured in a
white world.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Dancers of the spirit, too. Each black
dreamer a captured dancer of the spirit.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Aunt Hager’s
dreams for Sandy dancing far beyond the limitations of
their poverty, of their humble station in life, of their dark
skins.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wants you to be a great man, son,” she often told him,
sitting on the porch in the darkness, singing, dreaming,
calling up the deep past, creating dreams within the child.
“I wants you to be a great man.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And I won’t disappoint you!” Sandy said that hot
Chicago summer, just as though Hager were still there,
planning for him. “I won’t disappoint you!” he said, standing
straight in his sweltering red suit in the cage of the hotel
elevator. “I won’t disappoint you, Aunt Hager,” dreaming at
night in the stuffy little room in the great Black Belt of
Chicago. “I won’t disappoint you now,” opening his eyes at
dawn when Annjee shook him to get up and go to work
again.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap30'>CHAPTER XXX</h1></div>

<h3>Princess of the Blues</h3>

<p class='pindent'>One hot Monday in August Harrietta Williams, billed as
“The Princess of the Blues,” opened at the Monogram
Theatre on State Street. The screen had carried a slide of
her act the week previous, so Sandy knew she would be
there, and he and his mother were waiting anxiously for her
appearance. They were unable to find out before the performance
where she would be living, or if she had arrived in
town, but early that Monday evening Sandy hurried home
from work, and he and Annjee managed to get seats in the
theatre, although it was soon crowded to capacity and people
stood in the aisles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a typical Black Belt audience, laughing uproariously,
stamping its feet to the music, kidding the actors, and
joining in the performance, too. Rows of shiny black faces,
gay white teeth, bobbing heads. Everybody having a grand
time with the vaudeville, swift and amusing. A young tap-dancer
rhymed his feet across the stage, grinning from ear
to ear, stepping to the tantalizing music, ending with a series
of intricate and amazing contortions that brought
down the house. Then a sister act came on, with a stock of
sentimental ballads offered in a wholly jazzy manner. They
sang even a very melancholy mammy song with their hips
moving gaily at every beat.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>O, what would I do</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Without dear you,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Sweet mammy?</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>they moaned reverently, with their thighs shaking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aw, step it, sweet gals!” the men and boys in the audience
called approvingly. “We’ll be yo’ mammy and yo’
pappy, too! Do it, pretty mamas!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A pair of black-faced comedians tumbled on the stage as
the girls went off, and began the usual line of old jokes and
razor comedy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee, I wish Aunt Harriett’s act would come on,” Sandy
said as he and Annjee laughed nervously at the comedians.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Finally the two blacked-up fellows broke into a song
called <span class='it'>Walking the Dog</span>, flopping their long-toed shoes,
twirling their middles like egg-beaters, and made their exit
to a roar of laughter and applause. Then the canvas street-scene
rose, disclosing a gorgeous background of blue velvet,
with a piano and a floor-lamp in the centre of the stage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This is Harriett’s part now,” Sandy whispered excitedly
as a tall, yellow, slick-headed young man came in and immediately
began playing the piano. “And, mama, that’s Billy
Sanderlee!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure is!” said Annjee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly the footlights were lowered and the spotlight
flared, steadied itself at the right of the stage, and waited.
Then, stepping out from among the blue curtains, Harriett
entered in a dress of glowing orange, flame-like against the
ebony of her skin, barbaric, yet beautiful as a jungle
princess. She swayed towards the footlights, while Billy
teased the keys of the piano into a hesitating delicate jazz.
Then she began to croon a new song—a popular version of
an old Negro melody, refashioned with words from Broadway.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee, Aunt Harrie’s prettier than ever!” Sandy exclaimed
to his mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Same old Harriett,” said Annjee. “But kinder hoarse.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sings good, though,” Sandy cried when Harriett began
to snap her fingers, putting a slow, rocking pep into the
chorus, rolling her bright eyes to the tune of the melody as
the piano rippled and cried under Billy Sanderlee’s swift
fingers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s the same Harrie,” murmured Annjee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she appeared again, in an apron of blue calico,
with a bandanna handkerchief knotted about her head, she
walked very slowly. The man at the piano had begun to play
blues—the old familiar folk-blues—and the audience settled
into a receptive silence broken only by a “Lawdy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Good Lawdy! Lawd!” from some Southern lips at the back
of the house, as Harriett sang:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Red sun, red sun, why don’t you rise today?</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Red sun, O sun! Why don’t you rise today?</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Ma heart is breakin’—ma baby’s gone away.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>A few rows ahead of Annjee a woman cried out: “True,
Lawd!” and swayed her body.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Little birds, little birds, ain’t you gonna sing this morn?</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Says, little chirpin’ birds, ain’t you gonna sing this morn?</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I cannot sleep—ma lovin’ man is gone.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“Whee-ee-e! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Hab mercy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Moan it, gal!” exclamations
and shouts broke loose in the understanding audience.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Just like when papa used to play for her,” said Sandy. But
Annjee was crying, remembering Jimboy, and fumbling in
her bag for a handkerchief. On the stage the singer went
on—as though singing to herself—her voice sinking to a
bitter moan as the listeners rocked and swayed.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>It’s a mighty blue mornin’ when yo’ daddy leaves yo’ bed.</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>I says a blue, blue mornin’ when yo’ daddy leaves yo’ bed—</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>’Cause if you lose yo’ man, you’d just as well be dead!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Her final number was a dance-song which she sang in a
sparkling dress of white sequins, ending the act with a mad
collection of steps and a swift sudden whirl across the whole
stage as the orchestra joined Billy’s piano in a triumphant
arch of jazz.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The audience yelled and clapped and whistled for more,
stamping their feet and turning to one another with
shouted comments of enjoyment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee! She’s great,” said Sandy. When another act finally
had the stage after Harriett’s encores, he was anxious to get
back to the dressing-room to see her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maybe they won’t let us in,” Annjee objected timidly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s try,” Sandy insisted, pulling his mother up. “We
don’t want to hear this fat woman with the flag singing <span class='it'>Over
There</span>. You’ll start crying, anyhow. Come on, mama.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they got backstage, they found Harriett standing
in the dressing-room door laughing with one of the black-face
comedians, a summer fur over her shoulders, ready for
the street. Billy Sanderlee and the tap-dancing boy were
drinking gin from a bottle that Billy held, and Harriett was
holding her glass, when she saw Sandy coming.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her furs slipped to the floor. “My Lord!” she cried, enveloping
them in kisses. “What are you doing in Chicago,
Annjee? My, I’m mighty glad to see you, Sandy! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m
certainly surprised—and so happy I could cry.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Did you
catch our act tonight? Can’t Billy play the piano,
though? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Great heavens! Sandy, you’re twice as tall as
me! When did you leave home? How’s that long-faced sister
o’ mine, Tempy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>After repeated huggings the new-comers were introduced
to everybody around. Sandy noticed a certain harshness
in his aunt’s voice. “Smoking so much,” she explained
later. “Drinking, too, I guess. But a blues-singer’s supposed
to sing deep and hoarse, so it’s all right.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Beyond the drop curtain Sandy could hear the audience
laughing in the theatre, and occasionally somebody shouting
at the performers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on! Let’s go and get a bite to eat,” Harriett suggested
when they had finally calmed down enough to decide
to move on. “Billy and me are always hungry.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Where’s
Jimboy, Annjee? In the war, I suppose! It’d be just like that
big jigaboo to go and enlist first thing, whether he had to or
not. Billy here was due to go, too, but licker kept him out.
This white folks’ war for democracy ain’t so hot,
nohow! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Say, how’d you like to have some chop suey instead
of going to a regular restaurant?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In a Chinese café they found a quiet booth, where the
two sisters talked until past midnight—with Sandy and Billy
silent for the most part. Harriett told Annjee about Aunt
Hager’s death and the funeral that chill rainy day, and how
Tempy had behaved so coldly when it was all over.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I left Stanton the week after,” Harriett said, “and haven’t
been back since. Had hard times, too, but we’re kinder
lucky now, Billy and me—got some dates booked over the
Orpheum circuit soon. Liable to get wind of us at the Palace
on Broadway one o’ these days. Can’t tell! Things are
breakin’ pretty good for spade acts—since Jews are not like
the rest of the white folks. They will give you a break if
you’ve got some hot numbers to show ’em, whether you’re
colored or not. And Jews control the theatres.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the conversation went back to Stanton, when Hager
and Jimboy and all of them had lived together, laughing and
quarrelling and playing the guitar—while the tea got cold
and the chop suey hardened to a sticky mess as the sisters
wept. Billy marked busily on the table-cloth meanwhile
with a stubby pencil, explaining to Sandy a new and intricate
system he had found for betting on the numbers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Harrie and me plays every day. Won a hundred forty
dollars last week in Cleveland,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee! I ought to start playing,” Sandy exclaimed. “How
much do you put on each number?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, for a nickel you can win .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, you oughtn’t,” checked Harriett, suddenly conscious
of Billy’s conversation, turning towards Sandy with a
handkerchief to her eyes. “Don’t you fool with those numbers,
honey! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What are you trying to do, Billy, start the
boy off on your track? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You’ve got to get your education,
Sandy, and amount to something.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Guess you’re in high
school now, aren’t you, kid?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Third year,” said Sandy slowly, dreading a new argument
with his mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And determined to keep on going here this fall, in spite o’
my telling him I don’t see how,” put in Annjee. “Jimboy’s over
yonder, Lord knows where, and I certainly can’t take care of
Sandy and send him to school, too. No need of my trying—since
he’s big enough and old enough to hold a job and make
his own living. He ought to be wanting to help me, anyway.
Instead of that, he’s determined to go back to school.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Make his own living!” Harriett exclaimed, looking at
Annjee in astonishment. “You mean you want Sandy to stay
out of school to help you? What good is his little money to
you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, he helps with the room rent,” his mother said.
“And gets his meals where he works. That’s better’n we’d be
doing with him studying and depending on me to keep
things up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you mean better?” Harriett cried, glaring at
her sister excitedly, forgetting they had been weeping together
five minutes before. “For crying out loud—better?
Why, Aunt Hager’d turn over in her grave if she heard you
talking so calmly about Sandy leaving school—the way she
wanted to make something out of this kid.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. How much
do you earn a week?” Harriett asked suddenly, looking at
her nephew across the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Fourteen dollars.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Pshaw! Is that all? I can give you that much myself,”
Harriett said. “We’ve got straight bookings until Christmas—then
cabaret work’s good around here. Bill and I can
always make the dough—and you go to school.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want to, Aunt Harrie,” Sandy said, suddenly content.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yea, old man,” put in Billy. “And I’ll shoot you a little
change myself—to play the numbers,” he added, winking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well,” Annjee began, “what about .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Harriett ignored Billy’s interjection as well as her sister’s
open mouth. “Running an elevator for fourteen dollars
a week and losing your education!” she cried. “Good Lord!
Annjee, you ought to be ashamed, wanting him to keep that
up. This boy’s gotta get ahead—all of us niggers are too far
back in this white man’s country to let any brains go to
waste! Don’t you realize that? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You and me was foolish
all right, breaking mama’s heart, leaving school, but Sandy
can’t do like us. He’s gotta be what his grandma Hager
wanted him to be—able to help the black race, Annjee! You
hear me? Help the whole race!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want to,” Sandy said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Then you’ll stay in school!” Harriett affirmed, still
looking at Annjee. “You surely wouldn’t want him stuck in
an elevator for ever—just to help you, would you, sister?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I reckon I wouldn’t,” Annjee murmured, shaking her
head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You know damn well you wouldn’t,” Harriett concluded.
And, before they parted, she slipped a ten-dollar bill into
her nephew’s hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“For your books,” she said.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>When Sandy and his mother started home, it was very
late, but in a little Southern church in a side street, some old
black worshippers were still holding their nightly meeting.
High and fervently they were singing:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>By an’ by when de mawnin’ comes,</span></p>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>Saints an’ sinners all are gathered home.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>As the deep volume of sound rolled through the open
door, Annjee and her son stopped to listen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s like Stanton,” Sandy said, “and the tent in the Hickory
Woods.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure is!” his mother exclaimed. “Them old folks are still
singing—even in Chicago! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Funny how old folks like to
sing that way, ain’t it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s beautiful!” Sandy cried—for, vibrant and steady like
a stream of living faith, their song filled the whole night:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>An we’ll understand it better by an’ by!</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->
