<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<div><h1 id='chap06'>CHAPTER VI</h1></div>

<h3>Work</h3>

<p class='pindent'>The sunflowers in Willie-Mae’s back yard were taller than
Tom Johnson’s head, and the hollyhocks in the fence corners
were almost as high. The nasturtiums, blood-orange
and gold, tumbled over themselves all around Madam de
Carter’s house. Aunt Hager’s sweet-william, her pinks, and
her tiger-lilies were abloom and the apples on her single
tree would soon be ripe. The adjoining yards of the three
neighbors were gay with flowers. “Watch out for them
dogs!” his grandmother told Sandy hourly, for the days had
come when the bright heat made gentle animals go mad.
Bees were heavy with honey, great green flies hummed
through the air, yellow-black butterflies suckled at the rambling
roses .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and watermelons were on the market.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Royal African Knights and Ladies of King
Solomon’s Scepter were preparing a drill for the September
Emancipation celebration, a “Drill of All Nations,” in
which Annjee was to represent Sweden. It was not to be
given for a month or more, but the first rehearsal would
take place tonight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sandy,” his mother said, shaking him early in the morning
as he lay on his pallet at the foot of Aunt Hager’s bed,
“listen here! I want you to come out to Mis’ Rice’s this
evening and help me get through the dishes so’s I can start
home early, in time to wash and dress myself to go to the
lodge hall. You hears me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m,” said Sandy, keeping his eyes closed to the bright
stream of morning sunlight entering the window. But half
an hour later, when Jimboy kicked him and said: “Hey, bo!
You wanta go fishin’?” he got up at once, slid into his pants;
and together they went out in the garden to dig worms. It
was seldom that his father took him anywhere, and, of
course, he wanted to go. Sandy adored Jimboy, but Jimboy,
amiable and indulgent though he was, did not often care to
be bothered with his ten-year-old son on his fishing expeditions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Harriett had gone to her job, and Hager had long been at
the tubs under the apple-tree when the two males emerged
from the kitchen-door. “Huh! You ain’t workin’ this
mawnin’, is you?” the old woman grunted, bending steadily
down, then up, over the wash-board.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nope,” her tall son-in-law answered. “Donahoe laid me
off yesterday on account o’ the white bricklayers said they
couldn’t lay bricks with a nigger.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Always something to keep you from workin’,” panted
Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sure is,” agreed Jimboy pleasantly. “But don’t worry, me
and Sandy’s gonna catch you a mess o’ fish for supper today.
How’s that, ma?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t need no fish,” the old woman answered. “An’
don’t come ma-in’ me! Layin’ round here fishin’ when you
ought to be out makin’ money to take care o’ this house an’
that chile o’ your’n.” The suds rose foamy white about her
black arms as the clothes plushed up and down on the zinc
wash-board. “Lawd deliver me from a lazy darky!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Jimboy and Sandy were already behind the tall corn,
digging for bait near the back fence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t never let no one woman worry you,” said the boy’s
father softly, picking the moist wriggling worms from the
upturned loam. “Treat ’em like chickens, son. Throw ’em a
little corn and they’ll run after you, but don’t give ’em too
much. If you do, they’ll stop layin’ and expect you to wait on
’em.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will they?” asked Sandy.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>The warm afternoon sun made the river a languid sheet
of muddy gold, glittering away towards the bridge and the
flour-mills a mile and a half off. Here in the quiet, on the
end of a rotting jetty among the reeds, Jimboy and his son
sat silently. A long string of small silver fish hung down into
the water, keeping fresh, and the fishing-lines were flung
far out in the stream, waiting for more bites. Not a breeze
on the flat brown-gold river, not a ripple, not a sound. But
once the train came by behind them, pouring out a great
cloud of smoke and cinders and shaking the jetty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s Number Five,” said Jimboy. “Sure is flyin’,” as the
train disappeared between rows of empty box-cars far down
the track, sending back a hollow clatter as it shot past the
flour-mills, whose stacks could be dimly seen through the
heat haze. Once the engine’s whistle moaned shrilly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s gone now,” said Jimboy, as the last click of the
wheels died away. And, except for the drone of a green fly
about the can of bait, there was again no sound to disturb
the two fishermen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jimboy gazed at his lines. Across the river Sandy could
make out, in the brilliant sunlight, the gold of wheat-fields
and the green of trees on the hills. He wondered if it would
be nice to live over there in the country.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Man alive!” his father cried suddenly, hauling vigorously
at one of the lines. “Sure got a real bite now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Look at
this catfish.” From the water he pulled a large flopping lead-colored
creature, with a fierce white mouth bleeding and
gaping over the hook.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s on my line!” yelled Sandy. “I caught him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Pshaw!” laughed Jimboy. “You was setting there dreaming.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, I wasn’t!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But just then, at the mills, the five-o’clock whistles blew.
“Oh, gee, dad!” cried the boy, frightened. “I was s’posed to
go to Mis’ Rice’s to help mama, and I come near forgetting
it. She wants to get through early this evenin’ to go to lodge
meeting. I gotta hurry and go help her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, you better beat it then, and I’ll look out for your
line like I been doing and bring the fishes home.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So the little fellow balanced himself across the jetty,
scrambled up the bank, and ran down the railroad track towards
town. He was quite out of breath when he reached
the foot of Penrose Street, with Mrs. Rice’s house still ten
blocks away, so he walked awhile, then ran again, down the
long residential street, with its large houses sitting in green
shady lawns far back from the sidewalk. Sometimes a sprinkler,
attached to a long rubber hose, sprayed fountain-like
jets of cold water on the thirsty grass. In one yard three
golden-haired little girls were playing under an elm-tree,
and in another a man and some children were having a
leisurely game of croquet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Finally Sandy turned into a big yard. The delicious scent
of frying beefsteak greeted the sweating youngster as he
reached the screen of the white lady’s kitchen-door. Inside,
Annjee was standing over the hot stove seasoning something
in a saucepan, beads of perspiration on her dark face,
and large damp spots under the arms of her dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You better get here!” she said. “And me waiting for you
for the last hour. Here, take this pick and break some ice for
the tea.” Sandy climbed up on a stool and raised the ice-box
lid while his mother opened the oven and pulled out a pan
of golden-brown biscuits. “Made these for your father,” she
remarked. “The white folks ain’t asked for ’em, but they like
’em, too, so they can serve for both.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jimboy’s crazy
about biscuits.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Did he work today?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No’m,” said Sandy, jabbing at the ice. “We went fishing.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that moment Mrs. Rice came into the kitchen, tall and
blond, in a thin flowered gown. She was a middle-aged
white woman with a sharp nasal voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Annjee, I’d like the potatoes served just as they are in the
casserole. And make several slices of very thin toast for my
father. Now, be sure they <span class='it'>are</span> thin!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, ma’am,” said Annjee stirring a spoonful of flour into
the frying-pan, making a thick brown gravy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Old thin toast,” muttered Annjee when Mrs. Rice had
gone back to the front. “Always bothering round the
kitchen! Here ’tis lodge-meeting night—dinner late anyhow—and
she coming telling me to stop and make toast for
the old man! He ain’t too indigestible to eat biscuits like the
rest of ’em.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. White folks sure is a case!” She laid three
slices of bread on top of the stove. “So spoiled with colored
folks waiting on ’em all their days! Don’t know what they’ll
do in heaven, ’cause I’m gonna sit down up there myself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee took the biscuits, light and brown, and placed
some on a pink plate she had warmed. She carried them,
with the butter and jelly, into the dining-room. Then she
took the steak from the warmer, dished up the vegetables
into gold-rimmed serving-dishes, and poured the gravy,
which smelled deliciously onion-flavored.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gee, I’m hungry,” said the child, with his eyes on the big
steak ready to go in to the white people.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, just wait,” replied his mother. “You come to work,
not to eat.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Whee! but it’s hot today!” She wiped her wet
face and put on a large white bungalow apron that had been
hanging behind the door. Then she went with the iced tea
and a pitcher of water into the dining-room, struck a Chinese
gong, and came back to the kitchen to get the dishes of
steaming food, which she carried in to the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was some time before she returned from waiting on the
table; so Sandy, to help her, began to scrape out the empty
pans and put them to soak in the sink. He ate the stewed
corn that had stuck in the bottom of one, and rubbed a
piece of bread in the frying-pan where the gravy had been.
His mother came out with the water-pitcher, broke some
ice for it, and returned to the dining-room where Sandy
could hear laughter, and the clinking of spoons in tea-glasses,
and women talking. When Annjee came back into
the kitchen, she took four custards from the ice-box and
placed them on gold-rimmed plates.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’re about through,” she said to her son. “Sit down
and I’ll fix you up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy was very hungry and he hoped Mrs. Rice’s family
hadn’t eaten all the steak, which had looked so good with its
brown gravy and onions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Shortly, his mother returned carrying the dishes that had
been filled with hot food. She placed them on the kitchen-table
in front of Sandy, but they were no longer full and no
longer hot. The corn had thickened to a paste, and the potatoes
were about gone; but there was still a ragged piece of
steak left on the platter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t eat it all,” said Annjee warningly. “I want to take
some home to your father.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The bell rang in the dining-room. Annjee went through
the swinging door and returned bearing a custard that had
been but little touched.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here, sonny—the old man says it’s too sweet for his
stomach, so you can have this.” She set the yellow corn-starch
before Sandy. “He’s seen these ripe peaches out here
today and he wants some, that’s all. More trouble than he’s
worth, po’ old soul, and me in a hurry!” She began to peel
the fruit. “Just like a chile, ’deed he is!” she added, carrying
the sliced peaches into the dining-room and leaving Sandy
with a plate of food before him, eating slowly. “When you
rushing to get out, seems like white folks tries theirselves.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In a moment she returned, ill-tempered, and began to
scold Sandy for taking so long with his meal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I asked you to help me so’s I can get to the lodge on
time, and you just set and chew and eat! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Here, wipe
these dishes, boy!” Annjee began hurriedly to lay plates in a
steaming row on the shelf of the sink; so Sandy got up and,
between mouthfuls of pudding, wiped them with a large
dish-towel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Soon Mrs. Rice came into the kitchen again, briskly,
through the swinging door and glanced about her. Sandy
felt ashamed for the white woman to see him eating a leftover
pudding from her table, so he put the spoon down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Annjee,” the mistress said sharply. “I wish you wouldn’t
put quite so much onion in your sauce for the steak. I’ve
mentioned it to you several times before, and you know
very well we don’t like it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, ma’am,” said Annjee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And do <span class='it'>please</span> be careful that our drinking water is cold
before meals are served.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You were certainly careless
tonight. You must think more about what you are doing,
Annjee.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Rice went out again through the swinging door, but
Sandy stood near the sink with a burning face and eyes that
had suddenly filled with angry tears. He couldn’t help it—hearing
his sweating mother reprimanded by this tall white
woman in the flowered dress. Black, hard-working Annjee
answered: “Yes, ma’am,” and that was all—but Sandy cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dry up,” his mother said crossly when she saw him,
thinking he was crying because she had asked him to work.
“What’s come over you, anyway?—can’t even wipe a few
plates for me and act nice about it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He didn’t answer. When the dining-room had been
cleared and the kitchen put in order, Annjee told him to
empty the garbage while she wrapped in newspapers several
little bundles of food to carry to Jimboy. Then they went
out the back door, around the big house to the street, and
trudged the fourteen blocks to Aunt Hager’s, taking short
cuts through alleys, passing under arc-lights that sputtered
whitely in the deepening twilight, and greeting with an occasional
“Howdy” other poor colored folks also coming
home from work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How are you, Sister Jones?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Right smart, I thank yuh!” as they passed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once Annjee spoke to her son. “Evening’s the only time
we niggers have to ourselves!” she said. “Thank God for
night .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ’cause all day you gives to white folks.”</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
