<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<div>
				<h1 id="chap07">CHAPTER VII</h1>
			</div>
			<h3>White Folks</h3>
			<p>When they got home, Aunt Hager was sitting in the cool of the evening on her new porch, which had been rebuilt for thirty-five dollars added to the mortgage. The old woman was in her rocking-chair, with Jimboy, one foot on the ground and his back against a pillar, lounging at her feet. The two were quarrelling amicably over nothing as Annjee and Sandy approached.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood-evenin‚Äô, you-all,‚Äù said Annjee. ‚ÄúI brought you a nice piece o‚Äô steak, Jimboy-sugar, and some biscuits to go with it. Come on in and eat while I get dressed to go to the drill practice. I got to hurry.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe don‚Äôt want no steak now,‚Äù Jimboy answered without moving. ‚ÄúAunt Hager and me had fresh fish for supper and egg-corn-bread and we‚Äôre full. We don‚Äôt need nothin‚Äô more.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù said Annjee disappointedly. ‚ÄúWell, come on in anyhow, honey, and talk while I get dressed.‚Äù So he rose lazily and followed his wife into the house.</p>
			<p>Shortly, Sister Johnson, pursued by the ever-present Willie-Mae, came through the blue-grey darkness from next door. ‚ÄúGood-evenin‚Äô, Sister Williams; how you been today?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTolable,‚Äù answered Hager, ‚Äú‚Ää‚Äôceptin‚Äô I‚Äôs tired out from washin‚Äô an‚Äô rinsin‚Äô. Have a seat.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You Sandy, go in de house an‚Äô get Sister Johnson a settin‚Äô-chair.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Where‚Äôs Tom?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLawd, chile, he done gone to bed long ago. That there sewer-diggin‚Äô job ain‚Äôt so good fer a man old as Tom. He ‚Äôbout played out.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I done washed fer Mis‚Äô Cohn maself today.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Umh! dis cheer feels good!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Looked like to me she had near ‚Äôbout fifty babies‚Äô diddies in de wash. You know she done got twins, ‚Äôsides dat young-‚Äôun born last year.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The conversation of the two old women rambled on as their grandchildren ran across the front yard laughing, shrieking, wrestling; catching fire-flies and watching them glow in closed fists, then releasing them to twinkle in the sultry night-air.</p>
			<p>Harriett came singing out of the house and sat down on the edge of the porch. ‚ÄúLord, it‚Äôs hot!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ How are you, Mis‚Äô Johnson? I didn‚Äôt see you in the dark.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJest tolable, chile,‚Äù said the old woman, ‚Äúbut I can‚Äôt kick. Honey, when you gits old as I is, you‚Äôll be doin‚Äô well if you‚Äôs livin‚Äô a-tall, de way you chillens runs round now days! How come you ain‚Äôt out to some party dis evenin‚Äô?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO, there‚Äôs no party tonight,‚Äù said Harriett laughing. ‚ÄúBesides, this new job of mine‚Äôs a heartbreaker, Mis‚Äô Johnson. I got to stay home and rest now. I‚Äôm kitchen-girl at that New Albert Restaurant, and time you get through wrestling with pots and arguing with white waitresses and colored cooks, you don‚Äôt feel much like running out at night. But the shifts aren‚Äôt bad, though, food‚Äôs good, and‚ÅÝ‚Äîwell, you can‚Äôt expect everything.‚Äù She shrugged her shoulders against the two-by-four pillar on which her back rested.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLong‚Äôs it keeps you off de streets, I‚Äôs glad,‚Äù said Hager, rocking contentedly. ‚ÄúMaybe I can git you goin‚Äô to church agin now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAw, I don‚Äôt like church,‚Äù the girl replied.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAn‚Äô, chile, I can‚Äôt blame you much,‚Äù said Sister Johnson, fumbling in the pocket of her apron. ‚ÄúDe way dese churches done got now days.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Sandy, run in de house an‚Äô ask yo‚Äô pappy fo‚Äô a match to light ma pipe.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It ain‚Äôt ‚ÄòCome to Jesus‚Äô no mo‚Äô a-tall. Ministers dese days an‚Äô times don‚Äôt care nothin‚Äô ‚Äôbout po‚Äô Jesus. ‚ÄôStead o‚Äô dat it‚Äôs rally dis an‚Äô collection dat, an‚Äô de aisle wants a new carpet, an‚Äô de pastor needs a ‚Äôlectric fan fer his red-hot self.‚Äù The old sister spat into the yard. ‚ÄúMoney! That‚Äôs all ‚Äôtis! An‚Äô white folkses‚Äô religion‚ÅÝ‚ÄîLawd help! ‚ÄôTaint no use in mentionin‚Äô them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTrue,‚Äù agreed Hager.</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôCause if de gates o‚Äô heaven shuts in white folkses‚Äô faces like de do‚Äôs o‚Äô dey church in us niggers‚Äô faces, it‚Äôll be too bad! Yes, sir! One thing sho, de Lawd ain‚Äôt prejudiced!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù said Hager; ‚Äúbut He don‚Äôt love ugly, neither in niggers nor in white folks.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow, talking about white folks‚Äô religion,‚Äù said Annjee, emerging from the house with a fresh white dress on, ‚Äúwhy, Mis‚Äô Rice where I work don‚Äôt think no more about playing bridge on Sunday than she does about praying‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I ain‚Äôt never seen her pray yet.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôre nuts,‚Äù said Jimboy behind her. ‚ÄúPeople‚Äôs due to have a little fun on Sundays. That‚Äôs what‚Äôs the matter with colored folks now‚ÅÝ‚Äîwork all week and then set up in church all day Sunday, and don‚Äôt even know what‚Äôs goin‚Äô on in the rest of the world.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHuh!‚Äù grunted Hager.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, we won‚Äôt argue, daddy.‚Äù Annjee smiled. ‚ÄúCome on and walk a piece with me, sweetness. Here ‚Äôtis nearly nine and I should a been at the hall at eight, but colored folks are always behind the clock. Come on, Jimboy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood-bye, mama,‚Äù yelled Sandy from the lawn as his parents strolled up the street together.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJimboy‚Äôs right,‚Äù said Harriett. ‚ÄúDarkies do like the church too much, but white folks don‚Äôt care nothing about it at all. They‚Äôre too busy getting theirs out of this world, not from God. And I don‚Äôt blame ‚Äôem, except that they‚Äôre so mean to niggers. They‚Äôre right, though, looking out for themselves‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and yet I hate ‚Äôem for it. They don‚Äôt have to mistreat us besides, do they?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHoney, don‚Äôt talk that way,‚Äù broke in Hager. ‚ÄúIt ain‚Äôt Christian, chile. If you don‚Äôt like ‚Äôem, pray for ‚Äôem, but don‚Äôt feel evil against ‚Äôem. I was in slavery, Harrie, an‚Äô I been knowin‚Äô white folks all ma life, an‚Äô they‚Äôs good as far as they can see‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut when it comes to po‚Äô niggers, they just can‚Äôt see far, that‚Äôs all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Harriett opened her mouth to reply, but Jimboy, who left Annjee at the corner and had returned to the porch, beat her to it. ‚ÄúWe too dark for ‚Äôem, ma,‚Äù he laughed. ‚ÄúHow they gonna see in the dark? You colored folks oughta get lighter, that‚Äôs what!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShut up yo‚Äô mouth, you yaller rooster!‚Äù said Sister Johnson. ‚ÄúWhite folks is white folks, an‚Äô dey‚Äôs mean! I can‚Äôt help what Hager say,‚Äù the old woman disagreed emphatically with her crony. ‚ÄúAin‚Äôt I been knowin‚Äô crackers sixty-five years, an‚Äô ain‚Äôt dey de cause o‚Äô me bein‚Äô here in Stanton ‚Äôstead o‚Äô in ma home right today? De dirty buzzards! Ain‚Äôt I nussed t‚Äôree of ‚Äôem up from babies like ma own chillens, and ain‚Äôt dem same t‚Äôree boys done turned round an‚Äô helped run me an‚Äô Tom out o‚Äô town?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The old sister took a long draw on her corn-cob pipe, and a fiery red spot glowed in its bowl, while Willie-Mae and Sandy stopped playing and sat down on the porch as she began a tale they had all heard at least a dozen times.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôs tole you ‚Äôbout it befo‚Äô, ain‚Äôt I?‚Äù asked Sister Johnson.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot me,‚Äù lied Jimboy, who was anxious to keep her going.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, you haven‚Äôt,‚Äù Harriett assured her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, it were like dis,‚Äù and the story unwound itself, the preliminary details telling how, as a young freed-girl after the Civil War, Sister Johnson had gone into service for a white planter‚Äôs family in a Mississippi town near Vicksburg. While attached to this family, she married Tom Johnson, then a fieldhand, and raised five children of her own during the years that followed, besides caring for three boys belonging to her white mistress, nursing them at her black breasts and sometimes leaving her own young ones in the cabin to come and stay with her white charges when they were ill. These called her mammy, too, and when they were men and married, she still went to see them and occasionally worked for their families.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow, we niggers all lived at de edge o‚Äô town in what de whites called Crowville, an‚Äô most of us owned little houses an‚Äô farms, an‚Äô we did right well raisin‚Äô cotton an‚Äô sweet ‚Äôtaters an‚Äô all. Now, dat‚Äôs where de trouble started! We was doin‚Äô too well, an‚Äô de white folks said so! But we ain‚Äôt paid ‚Äôem no ‚Äôtention, jest thought dey was talkin‚Äô fer de pastime of it.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Well, we all started fixin‚Äô up our houses an‚Äô paintin‚Äô our fences, an‚Äô Crowville looked kinder decent-like when de white folks ‚Äôgin to ‚Äômark, so‚Äôs we servants could hear ‚Äôem, ‚Äôbout niggers livin‚Äô in painted houses an‚Äô dressin‚Äô fine like we was somebody!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Well, dat went on fer some time wid de whites talkin‚Äô an‚Äô de coloreds doin‚Äô better‚Äôn better year by year, sellin‚Äô mo‚Äô cotton ever‚Äô day an‚Äô gittin‚Äô nice furniture an‚Äô buyin‚Äô pianers, till by an‚Äô by a prosp‚Äôrous nigger named John Lowdins up an‚Äô bought one o‚Äô dese here new autimobiles‚ÅÝ‚Äîan‚Äô dat settled it!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ A white man in town one Sat‚Äôday night tole John to git out o‚Äô dat damn car ‚Äôcause a nigger ain‚Äôt got no business wid a autimobile nohow! An‚Äô John say: ‚ÄòI ain‚Äôt gonna git out!‚Äô Den de white man, what‚Äôs been drinkin‚Äô, jump up on de runnin‚Äô-bo‚Äôad an‚Äô bust John in de mouth fer talkin‚Äô back to him‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe a white man, an‚Äô Lowdins nothin‚Äô but a nigger. ‚ÄòDe very idee!‚Äô he say, and hit John in de face six or seven times. Den John drawed his gun! One! two! t‚Äôree! he fiah, hit dis old redneck cracker in de shoulder, but he ain‚Äôt dead! Ain‚Äôt nothin‚Äô meant to kill a cracker what‚Äôs drunk! But John think he done kilt this white man, an‚Äô so he left him kickin‚Äô in de street while he runs that car o‚Äô his‚Äôn lickety-split out o‚Äô town, goes to Vicksburg, an‚Äô catches de river boat.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Well, sir! Dat night Crowville‚Äôs plumb full o‚Äô white folks wid dogs an‚Äô guns an‚Äô lanterns, shoutin‚Äô an‚Äô yellin‚Äô an‚Äô scarin‚Äô de wits out o‚Äô us coloreds an‚Äô waitin‚Äô us up way late in de night-time lookin‚Äô fer John, an‚Äô dey don‚Äôt find him.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Den dey say dey gwine teach dem Crowville niggers a lesson, all of ‚Äôem, paintin‚Äô dey houses an‚Äô buyin‚Äô cars an‚Äô livin‚Äô like white folks, so dey comes to our do‚Äôs an‚Äô tells us to leave our houses‚ÅÝ‚Äîgit de hell out in de fields, ‚Äôcause dey don‚Äôt want to kill nobody there dis evenin‚Äô!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Well, sir! Niggers in night-gowns an‚Äô underwear an‚Äô shimmies, half-naked an‚Äô barefooted, was runnin‚Äô ever‚Äô which way in de dark, scratchin‚Äô up dey legs in de briah patches, failin‚Äô on dey faces, scared to death! Po‚Äô ole Pheeny, what ain‚Äôt moved from her bed wid de paralytics fo‚Äô six years, dey made her daughters carry her out, screamin‚Äô an‚Äô wall-eyed, an‚Äô set her in de middle o‚Äô de cotton-patch. An‚Äô Brian, what was sleepin‚Äô naked, jumps up an‚Äô grabs his wife‚Äôs apron and runs like a rabbit with not another blessed thing on! Chillens squallin‚Äô ever‚Äôwhere, an‚Äô mens a-pleadin‚Äô an‚Äô a-cussin‚Äô, an‚Äô womens cryin‚Äô ‚ÄòLawd‚Äôa‚ÄôMercy‚Äô wid de whites of dey eyes showin‚Äô!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Den looked like to me ‚Äôbout five hundred white men took torches an‚Äô started burnin‚Äô wid fiah ever‚Äô last house, an‚Äô henhouse, an‚Äô shack, an‚Äô barn, an‚Äô privy, an‚Äô shed, an‚Äô cow-slant in de place! An‚Äô all de niggers, when de fiah blaze up, was moanin‚Äô in de fields, callin‚Äô on de Lawd fer help! An‚Äô de fiah light up de whole country clean back to de woods! You could smell fiah, an‚Äô you could see it red, an‚Äô taste de smoke, an‚Äô feel it stingin‚Äô yo‚Äô eyes. An‚Äô you could hear de bo‚Äôads a-fallin‚Äô an‚Äô de glass a-poppin‚Äô, an‚Äô po‚Äô animals roastin‚Äô an‚Äô fryin‚Äô an‚Äô a-tearin‚Äô at dey halters. An‚Äô one cow run out, fiah all ovah, wid her milk streamin‚Äô down. An‚Äô de smoke roll up, de cotton-fields were red‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ an‚Äô dey ain‚Äôt been no mo‚Äô Crowville after dat night. No, sir! De white folks ain‚Äôt left nothin‚Äô fer de niggers, not nary bo‚Äôad standin‚Äô one ‚Äôbove another, not even a dog-house.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ When it were done‚ÅÝ‚Äînothin‚Äô but ashes!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ De white mens was ever‚Äôwhere wid guns, scarin‚Äô de po‚Äô blacks an‚Äô keepin‚Äô ‚Äôem off, an‚Äô one of ‚Äôem say: ‚ÄòI got good mind to try yo‚Äô-all‚Äôs hide, see is it bullet proof‚ÅÝ‚Äîgittin‚Äô so prosp‚Äôrous, paintin‚Äô yo‚Äô houses an‚Äô runnin ovah white folks wid yo‚Äô damn gasoline buggies! Well, after dis you‚Äôll damn sight have to bend yo‚Äô backs an‚Äô work a little!‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Dat‚Äôs what de white man say.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But we didn‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Äînot yit! ‚ÄôCause ever‚Äô last nigger moved from there dat Sunday mawnin‚Äô. It were right funny to see ole folks what ain‚Äôt never been out o‚Äô de backwoods pickin‚Äô up dey feet an‚Äô goin‚Äô. Ma Bailey say: ‚ÄòDe¬ÝLawd done let me live eighty years in one place, but ma next eighty‚Äôll be spent in St.¬ÝLouis.‚Äô An‚Äô she started out walkin‚Äô wid neither bag nor baggage.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ An‚Äô me an‚Äô Tom took Willie-Mae an‚Äô went to Cairo, an‚Äô Tom started railroad-workin‚Äô wid a gang; then we come on up here, been five summers ago dis August. We ain‚Äôt had not even a rag o‚Äô clothes when we left Crowville‚ÅÝ‚Äîso don‚Äôt tell me ‚Äôbout white folks bein‚Äô good, Hager, ‚Äôcause I knows ‚Äôem.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Yes, indeedy, I really knows ‚Äôem.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Dey done made us leave our home.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The old woman knocked her pipe against the edge of the porch, emptying its dead ashes into the yard, and for a moment no one spoke. Sandy, trembling, watched a falling star drop behind the trees. Then Jimboy‚Äôs deep voice, like a bitter rumble in the dark, broke the silence.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI know white folks, too,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI lived in the South.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd I ain‚Äôt never been South,‚Äù added Harriett hoarsely, ‚Äúbut I know ‚Äôem right here‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and I hate ‚Äôem!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDe¬ÝLawd hears you,‚Äù said Hager.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt care if He does hear me, mama! You and Annjee are too easy. You just take whatever white folks give you‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>coon</em> to your face, and <em>nigger</em> behind your backs‚ÅÝ‚Äîand don‚Äôt say nothing. You run to some white person‚Äôs back door for every job you get, and then they pay you one dollar for five dollars‚Äô worth of work, and fire you whenever they get ready.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey do that all right,‚Äù said Jimboy. ‚ÄúThey don‚Äôt mind firin‚Äô you. Wasn‚Äôt I layin‚Äô brick on the <i>Daily Leader</i> building and the white union men started sayin‚Äô they couldn‚Äôt work with me because I wasn‚Äôt in the union? So the boss come up and paid me off. ‚ÄòGood man, too,‚Äô he says to me, ‚Äòbut I can‚Äôt buck the union.‚Äô So I said I‚Äôd join, but I knew they wouldn‚Äôt let me before I went to the office. Anyhow, I tried. I told the guys there I was a bricklayer and asked ‚Äôem how I was gonna work if I couldn‚Äôt be in the union. And the fellow who had the cards, secretary I guess he was, says kinder sharp, like he didn‚Äôt want to be bothered: ‚ÄòThat‚Äôs your look-out, big boy, not mine.‚Äô So you see how much the union cares if a black man works or not.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAin‚Äôt Tom had de same trouble?‚Äù affirmed Sister Johnson. ‚ÄúGot put off de job mo‚Äôn once on ‚Äôcount o‚Äô de white unions.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO, they‚Äôve got us cornered, all right,‚Äù said Jimboy. ‚ÄúThe white folks are like farmers that own all the cows and let the niggers take care of ‚Äôem. Then they make you pay a sweet price for skimmed milk and keep the cream for themselves‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I reckon cream‚Äôs too rich for rusty-kneed niggers anyhow!‚Äù</p>
			<p>They laughed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs a good one!‚Äù said Harriett. ‚ÄúYou know old man Wright, what owns the flour-mill and the new hotel‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow he made his start off colored women working in his canning factory? Well, when he built that orphan home for colored and gave it to the city last year, he had the whole place made just about the size of the dining-room at his own house. They got the little niggers in that asylum cooped up like chickens. And the reason he built it was to get the colored babies out of the city home, with its nice playgrounds, because he thinks the two races oughtn‚Äôt to mix! But he don‚Äôt care how hard he works his colored help in that canning factory of his, does he? Wasn‚Äôt I there thirteen hours a day in tomato season? Nine cents an hour and five cents overtime after ten hours‚ÅÝ‚Äîand you better work overtime if you want to keep the job!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ As for the races mixing‚ÅÝ‚Äîask some of those high yellow women who work there. They know a mighty lot about the races mixing!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMost of ‚Äôem lives in de Bottoms, where de sportin‚Äô houses are,‚Äù said Hager. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a shame de way de white mens keeps them sinful places goin‚Äô.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt ain‚Äôt Christian, is it?‚Äù mocked Harriett.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúWhite folks!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And she shrugged her shoulders scornfully. Many disagreeable things had happened to her through white folks. Her first surprising and unpleasantly lasting impression of the pale world had come when, at the age of five, she had gone alone one day to play in a friendly white family‚Äôs yard. Some mischievous small boys there, for the fun of it, had taken hold of her short kinky braids and pulled them, dancing round and round her and yelling: ‚ÄúBlackie! Blackie! Blackie!‚Äù while she screamed and tried to run away. But they held her and pulled her hair terribly, and her friends laughed because she <em>was</em> black and she <em>did</em> look funny. So from that time on, Harriett had been uncomfortable in the presence of whiteness, and that early hurt had grown with each new incident into a rancor that she could not hide and a dislike that had become pain.</p>
			<p>Now, because she could sing and dance and was always amusing, many of the white girls in high school were her friends. But when the three-thirty bell rang and it was time to go home, Harriett knew their polite ‚ÄúGood-bye‚Äù was really a kind way of saying: ‚ÄúWe can‚Äôt be seen on the streets with a colored girl.‚Äù To loiter with these same young ladies had been all right during their grade-school years, when they were all younger, but now they had begun to feel the eyes of young white boys staring from the windows of pool halls, or from the tennis-courts near the park‚ÅÝ‚Äîso it was not proper to be seen with Harriett.</p>
			<p>But a very unexpected stab at the girl‚Äôs pride had come only a few weeks ago when she had gone with her classmates, on tickets issued by the school, to see an educational film of the under-sea world at the Palace Theatre, on Main Street. It was a special performance given for the students, and each class had had seats allotted to them beforehand; so Harriett sat with her class and had begun to enjoy immensely the strange wonders of the ocean depths when an usher touched her on the shoulder.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe last three rows on the left are for colored,‚Äù the girl in the uniform said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBut‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBut I‚Äôm with my class,‚Äù Harriett stammered. ‚ÄúWe‚Äôre all supposed to sit here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can‚Äôt help it,‚Äù insisted the usher, pointing towards the rear of the theatre, while her voice carried everywhere. ‚ÄúThem‚Äôs the house rules. No argument now‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôll have to move.‚Äù</p>
			<p>So Harriett rose and stumbled up the dark aisle and out into the sunlight, her slender body hot with embarrassment and rage. The teacher saw her leave the theatre without a word of protest, and none of her white classmates defended her for being black. They didn‚Äôt care.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll white people are alike, in school and out,‚Äù Harriett concluded bitterly, as she told of her experiences to the folks sitting with her on the porch in the dark.</p>
			<p>Once, when she had worked for a Mrs.¬ÝLeonard Baker on Martin Avenue, she accidentally broke a precious cut-glass pitcher used to serve some out-of-town guests. And when she tried to apologize for the accident, Mrs.¬ÝBaker screamed in a rage: ‚ÄúShut up, you impudent little black wench! Talking back to me after breaking up my dishes. All you darkies are alike‚ÅÝ‚Äîcareless sluts‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I wouldn‚Äôt have a one of you in my house if I could get anybody else to work for me without paying a fortune. You‚Äôre all impossible.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo that‚Äôs the way white people feel,‚Äù Harriett said to Aunt Hager and Sister Johnson and Jimboy, while the two children listened. ‚ÄúThey wouldn‚Äôt have a single one of us around if they could help it. It don‚Äôt matter to them if we‚Äôre shut out of a job. It don‚Äôt matter to them if niggers have only the back row at the movies. It don‚Äôt matter to them when they hurt our feelings without caring and treat us like slaves down South and like beggars up North. No, it don‚Äôt matter to them.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ White folks run the world, and the only thing colored folks are expected to do is work and grin and take off their hats as though it don‚Äôt matter.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ O, I hate ‚Äôem!‚Äù Harriett cried, so fiercely that Sandy was afraid. ‚ÄúI hate white folks!‚Äù she said to everybody on the porch in the darkness. ‚ÄúYou can pray for ‚Äôem if you want to, mama, but I hate ‚Äôem!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I hate white folks!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I hate ‚Äôem all!‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
