<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II: Conversation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Conversation</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was broad daylight in the town of Stanton and had been for a long time.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGet out o‚Äô that bed, boy!‚Äù Aunt Hager yelled. ‚ÄúHere‚Äôs Buster waitin‚Äô out in de yard to play with you, an‚Äô you still sleepin‚Äô!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAw, tell him to cut off his curls,‚Äù retorted Sandy, but his grandmother was in no mood for fooling.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúStop talkin‚Äô ‚Äôbout that chile‚Äôs haid and put yo‚Äô clothes on. Nine o‚Äôclock an‚Äô you ain‚Äôt up yet! Shame on you!‚Äù She shouted from the kitchen, where Sandy could hear the fire crackling and smell coffee boiling.</p>
			<p>He kicked the sheet off with his bare feet and rolled over and over on the soft feather tick. There was plenty of room to roll now, because his mother had long since got up and gone to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬Ý<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J.</abbr> Rice‚Äôs to work.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTell Bus I‚Äôm coming,‚Äù Sandy yelled, jumping into his trousers and running with bare feet towards the door. ‚ÄúIs he got his marbles?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCome back here, sir, an‚Äô put them shoes on,‚Äù cried Hager, stopping him on his way out. ‚ÄúYo‚Äô feet‚Äôll get long as yardsticks and flat as pancakes runnin‚Äô round barefooted all de time. An‚Äô wash yo‚Äô face, sir. Buster ain‚Äôt got a thing to do but wait. An‚Äô eat yo‚Äô breakfast.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The air was warm with sunlight, and hundreds of purple and white morning-glories laughed on the back fence. Earth and sky were fresh and clean after the heavy night-rain, and the young corn-shoots stood straight in the garden, and green pea-vines wound themselves around their crooked sticks. There was the mingled scent of wet soil and golden pollen on the breeze that blew carelessly through the clear air.</p>
			<p>Buster sat under the green apple-tree with a pile of black mud from the alley in front of him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHey, Sandy, gonna make marbles and put ‚Äôem in the sun to dry,‚Äù he said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll right,‚Äù agreed Sandy, and they began to roll mud balls in the palms of their hands. But instead of putting them in the sun to dry they threw them against the back of the house, where they flattened and stuck beautifully. Then they began to throw them at each other.</p>
			<p>Sandy‚Äôs playmate was a small ivory-white Negro child with straight golden hair, which his mother made him wear in curls. His eyes were blue and doll-like and he in no way resembled a colored youngster; but he was colored. Sandy himself was the shade of a nicely browned piece of toast, with dark, brown-black eyes and a head of rather kinky, sandy hair that would lie smooth only after a rigorous application of vaseline and water. That was why folks called him Annjee‚Äôs sandy-headed child, and then just‚ÅÝ‚ÄîSandy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe takes after his father,‚Äù Sister Lowry said, ‚Äú‚Ää‚Äôcept he‚Äôs not so light. But he‚Äôs gonna be a mighty good-lookin‚Äô boy when he grows up, that‚Äôs sho!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I hopes he does,‚Äù Aunt Hager said. ‚ÄúBut I‚Äôd rather he‚Äôd be ugly ‚Äôfore he turns out anything like that good-for-nothing Jimboy what comes here an‚Äô stays a month, goes away an‚Äô stays six, an‚Äô don‚Äôt hit a tap o‚Äô work ‚Äôcept when he feels like it. If it wasn‚Äôt for Annjee, don‚Äôt know how we‚Äôd eat, ‚Äôcause Sandy‚Äôs father sho don‚Äôt do nothin‚Äô to support him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>All the colored people in Stanton knew that Hager bore no love for Jimboy Rodgers, the tall good-looking yellow fellow whom her second daughter had married.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFirst place, I don‚Äôt like his name,‚Äù she would say in private. ‚ÄúWho ever heard of a nigger named Jimboy, anyhow? Next place, I ain‚Äôt never seen a yaller dude yet that meant a dark woman no good‚ÅÝ‚Äîan‚Äô Annjee is dark!‚Äù Aunt Hager had other objections, too, although she didn‚Äôt like to talk evil about folks. But what she probably referred to in her mind was the question of his ancestry, for nobody knew who Jimboy‚Äôs parents were.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>‚ÄúSandy, look out for the house while I run down an‚Äô see how is Mis‚Äô Gavitt‚Äôs niece. An‚Äô you-all play outdoors. Don‚Äôt bring no chillen in, litterin‚Äô up de place.‚Äù About eleven o‚Äôclock Aunt Hager pulled a dustcap over her head and put on a clean white apron. ‚ÄúHere, tie it for me, chile,‚Äù she said, turning her broad back. ‚ÄúAn‚Äô mind you don‚Äôt hurt yo‚Äôself on no rusty nails and rotten boards left from de storm. I‚Äôll be back atter while.‚Äù And she disappeared around the house, walking proudly, her black face shining in the sunlight.</p>
			<p>Presently the two boys under the apple-tree were joined by a coal-colored little girl who lived next door, one Willie-Mae Johnson, and the mud balls under her hands became mud pies carefully rounded and patted and placed in the sun on the small box where the little chickens lived. Willie-Mae was the mama, Sandy the papa, and Buster the baby as the old game of ‚Äúplaying house‚Äù began anew.</p>
			<p>By and by the mailman‚Äôs whistle blew and the three children scampered towards the sidewalk to meet him. The carrier handed Sandy a letter. ‚ÄúTake it in the house,‚Äù he said. But instead the youngsters sat on the front-door-sill, their feet dangling where the porch had been, and began to examine the envelope.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI bet that‚Äôs Lincoln‚Äôs picture,‚Äù said Buster.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, ‚Äôtaint,‚Äù declared Willie-Mae. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs Rossiefelt!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAw, it‚Äôs Washington,‚Äù said Sandy. ‚ÄúAnd don‚Äôt you-all touch my mama‚Äôs letter with your hands all muddy. It might be from my papa, you can‚Äôt tell, and she wants it kept clean.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôTis from Jimboy,‚Äù Aunt Hager declared when she returned, accompanied by her old friend, Sister Whiteside, who peddled on foot fresh garden-truck she raised herself. Aunt Hager had met her at the corner.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI knows his writin‚Äô,‚Äù went on Hager. ‚ÄúAn‚Äô it‚Äôs got a postmark, K-A-N-, Kansas City! That‚Äôs what ‚Äôtis! Niggers sho do love Kansas City!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Huh!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ So that‚Äôs where he‚Äôs at. Well, yo‚Äô mama‚Äôll be glad to get it. If she knowed it was here, she‚Äôd quit work an‚Äô come home now.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Sit down, Whiteside. We gwine eat in a few minutes. You better have a bite with us an‚Äô stay an‚Äô rest yo‚Äôself awhile, ‚Äôcause I knows you been walkin‚Äô this mawnin‚Äô!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôDeed I is,‚Äù the old sister declared, dropping her basket of lettuce and peas on the floor and taking a chair next to the table in the kitchen. ‚ÄúAn‚Äô I ain‚Äôt sold much neither. Seems like folks ain‚Äôt got no buyin‚Äô appetite after all that storm an‚Äô wind last night‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut de Lawd will provide! I ain‚Äôt worried.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs right,‚Äù agreed Hager. ‚ÄúMight o‚Äô been me blowed away maself, ‚Äôstead o‚Äô just ma porch, if Jesus hadn‚Äôt been with us.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You Sandy! Make haste and wash yo‚Äô hands, sir. Rest o‚Äô you chillens go on home, ‚Äôcause I know yo‚Äô ma‚Äôs lookin‚Äô for you.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Huh! This wood fire‚Äôs mighty low!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Hager uncovered a pot that had been simmering on the stove all morning and dished up a great bowlful of black-eyed peas and salt pork. There was biscuit bread left from breakfast. A plate of young onions and a pitcher of lemonade stood on the white oilcloth-covered table. Heads were automatically bowed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLawd, make us thankful for this food. For Christ‚Äôs sake, amen,‚Äù said Hager; then the two old women and the child began to eat.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs Elvira‚Äôs boy, ain‚Äôt it‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat yaller-headed young-one was here playin‚Äô with Sandy?‚Äù Sister Whiteside had her mouth full of onions and beans as she asked the question.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShsss!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ That‚Äôs her child!‚Äù said Hager. ‚ÄúBut it ain‚Äôt Eddie‚Äôs!‚Äù She gave her guest a meaning glance across the table, then lowered her voice, pretending all the while that Sandy‚Äôs ears were too young to hear. ‚ÄúThey say she had that chile ‚Äôfore she married Eddie. An‚Äô black as Eddie is, you knows an‚Äô I knows ain‚Äôt due to be no golden hair in de family!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI knowed there must be something funny,‚Äù whispered the old sister, screwing up her face. ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs some white man‚Äôs chile!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSho it is!‚Äù agreed Hager.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúI knowed it all de time.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Have some mo‚Äô meat, Whiteside. Help yo‚Äôself! We ain‚Äôt got much, but such as ‚Äôtis, you‚Äôre welcome.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Yes, sir, Buster‚Äôs some white man‚Äôs chile.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Stop reachin‚Äô cross de table for bread, Sandy. Where‚Äôs yo‚Äô manners, sir? I declare, chillens do try you sometimes.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Pass me de onions.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTruth, they tries you, yit I gits right lonesome since all ma young ones is gone.‚Äù Sister Whiteside worked her few good teeth vigorously, took a long swallow of lemonade, and smacked her lips. ‚ÄúChillen an‚Äô grandchillen all in Chicago an‚Äô <abbr>St.</abbr>¬ÝLouis an‚Äô Wichita, an‚Äô nary chick nor child left with me in de house.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Pass me de bread, thank yuh.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I feels kinder sad an‚Äô sorry at times, po‚Äô widder-woman that I is. I has ma garden an‚Äô ma hens, but all ma chillens done grown and married.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Where‚Äôs yo‚Äô daughter Harriett at now, Hager? Is she married, too? I ain‚Äôt seen her lately.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Hager pulled a meat skin through her teeth; then she answered: ‚ÄúNo, chile, she too young to marry yet! Ain‚Äôt but sixteen, but she‚Äôs been workin‚Äô out this summer, waitin‚Äô table at de Stanton County Country Club. Been in de country three weeks now, since school closed, but she comes in town on Thursdays, though. It‚Äôs nigh six miles from here, so de women-help sleeps there at night. I‚Äôs glad she‚Äôs out there, Sister. Course Harriett‚Äôs a good girl, but she likes to be frisky‚ÅÝ‚Äîwants to run de streets ‚Äôtendin‚Äô parties an‚Äô dances, an‚Äô I can‚Äôt do much with her no mo‚Äô, though I hates to say it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut she‚Äôs a songster, Hager! An‚Äô I hears she‚Äôs sho one smart chile, besides. They say she‚Äôs up with them white folks when it comes to books. An‚Äô de high school where she‚Äôs goin‚Äô ain‚Äôt easy.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ All ma young ones quit ‚Äôfore they got through with it‚ÅÝ‚Äîwouldn‚Äôt go‚ÅÝ‚Äîruther have a good time runnin‚Äô to Kansas City an‚Äô galavantin‚Äô round.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDe Lawd knows it‚Äôs a hard job, keepin‚Äô colored chillens in school, Sister Whiteside, a mighty hard job. De niggers don‚Äôt help ‚Äôem, an‚Äô de white folks don‚Äôt care if they stay or not. An‚Äô when they gets along sixteen an‚Äô seventeen, they wants this, an‚Äô they wants that, an‚Äô t‚Äôother‚ÅÝ‚Äîan‚Äô when you ain‚Äôt got it to give to ‚Äôem, they quits school an‚Äô goes to work.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Harriett say she ain‚Äôt goin‚Äô back next fall. I feels right hurt over it, but she ‚Äôclares she ain‚Äôt goin‚Äô back to school. Says there ain‚Äôt no use in learnin‚Äô books fo‚Äô nothin‚Äô but to work in white folks‚Äô kitchens when she‚Äôs graduated.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo she, Hager? I‚Äôs sho sorry! I‚Äôs gwine to talk to that gal. Get Reverend Berry to talk to her, too.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You‚Äôs struggled to bring up yo‚Äô chillens, an‚Äô all we Christians in de church ought to help you! I gwine see Reverend Berry, see can‚Äôt he ‚Äôsuade her to stay in school.‚Äù The old woman reached for the onions. ‚ÄúBut you ain‚Äôt never raised no boys, though, has you, Hager?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I ain‚Äôt. My two boy-chillens both died ‚Äôfore they was ten. Just these three girls‚ÅÝ‚ÄîTempy, an‚Äô Annjee, an‚Äô Harriett‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs all I got. An‚Äô this here grandchile, Sandy.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Take yo‚Äô hands off that meat, sir! You had ‚Äônough!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLawd, you‚Äôs been lucky! I done raised seven grandchillen ‚Äôsides eight o‚Äô ma own. An‚Äô they don‚Äôt thank me. No, sir! Go off and kick up they heels an‚Äô git married an‚Äô don‚Äôt thank me a bit! Don‚Äôt even write, some of ‚Äôem.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Waitin‚Äô fo‚Äô me to die, I reckon, so‚Äôs they can squabble over de little house I owns an‚Äô ma garden.‚Äù The old visitor pushed back her chair. ‚ÄúHuh! Yo‚Äô dinner was sho good!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Waitin‚Äô fo‚Äô me to die.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúUnhuh!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ That‚Äôs de way with ‚Äôem, Sister Whiteside. Chillens don‚Äôt care‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I reckon we old ones can‚Äôt kick much. They‚Äôs got to get off fo‚Äô themselves. It‚Äôs natural, that‚Äôs what ‚Äôtis. Now, my Tempy, she‚Äôs married and doin‚Äô well. Got a fine house, an‚Äô her husband‚Äôs a mail-clerk in de civil service makin‚Äô good money. They don‚Äôt ‚Äôsociate no mo‚Äô with none but de high-toned colored folks, like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝMitchell, an‚Äô Mis‚Äô Ada Walls, an‚Äô Madam <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Frances Smith. Course Tempy don‚Äôt come to see me much ‚Äôcause I still earns ma livin‚Äô with ma arms in de tub. But Annjee run in their house out o‚Äô the storm last night an‚Äô she say Tempy‚Äôs just bought a new pianer, an‚Äô de house looks fine.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I‚Äôs glad fo‚Äô de chile.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSho, sho you is, Sister Williams, you‚Äôs a good mother an‚Äô I knows you‚Äôs glad. But I hears from Reverend Berry that Tempy‚Äôs done withdrawed from our church an‚Äô joined de Episcopals!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs right! She is. Last time I seed Tempy, she told me she couldn‚Äôt stand de Baptist no mo‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Äîtoo many low niggers belonging, she say, so she‚Äôs gonna join Father Hill‚Äôs church, where de best people go.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I told her I didn‚Äôt think much o‚Äô joinin‚Äô a church so far away from God that they didn‚Äôt want nothin‚Äô but yaller niggers for members, an‚Äô so full o‚Äô forms an‚Äô fashions that a good Christian couldn‚Äôt shout‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut she went on an‚Äô joined. It‚Äôs de stylish temple, that‚Äôs why, so I ain‚Äôt said no mo‚Äô. Tempy‚Äôs goin‚Äô on thirty-five now, she‚Äôs ma oldest chile, an‚Äô I reckon she knows how she wants to act.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, I reckon she do.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But there ain‚Äôt no church like de Baptist, praise God! Is there, Sister? If you ain‚Äôt been dipped in that water an‚Äô half drowned, you ain‚Äôt saved. Tempy don‚Äôt know like we do. No, sir, she don‚Äôt know!‚Äù</p>
			<p>There was no fruit or dessert, and the soiled plates were not removed from the table for a long time, for the two old women, talking about their children, had forgotten the dishes. Young flies crawled over the biscuit bread and hummed above the bowl of peas, while the wood fire died in the stove, and Sandy went out into the sunshine to play.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow, ma girl, Maggie,‚Äù said Sister Whiteside; ‚Äúde man she married done got to be a big lawyer in <abbr>St.</abbr>¬ÝLouis. He‚Äôs in de politics there, an‚Äô Maggie‚Äôs got a fine job herself‚ÅÝ‚Äîsocial servin‚Äô, they calls it. But I do‚Äôt hear from her once a year. An‚Äô she don‚Äôt send me a dime. Ma boys looks out for me, though, sometimes, round Christmas. There‚Äôs Lucius, what runs on de railroad, an‚Äô then Andrew, what rides de horses, an‚Äô John, in Omaha, sends me a little change now an‚Äô then‚ÅÝ‚Äîall but Charlie, an‚Äô he never was thoughtful ‚Äôbout his mother. He ain‚Äôt never sent me nothin‚Äô.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, you sho is lucky,‚Äù said Hager, ‚Äú‚Ää‚Äôcause they ain‚Äôt no money comes in this house, Christmas nor no other time, less‚Äôn me an‚Äô Annjee brings it here. Jimboy ain‚Äôt no good, an‚Äô what Harriett makes goes for clothes and parties an‚Äô powderin‚Äô-rags. Course, I takes some from her every week, but I gives it right back for her school things. An‚Äô I ain‚Äôt taken nothin‚Äô from her these three weeks she‚Äôs been workin‚Äô at de club. She say she‚Äôs savin‚Äô her money herself. She‚Äôs past sixteen now, so I lets her have it.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Po‚Äô little thing!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ She does need to look purty.‚Äù Hager‚Äôs voice softened and her dark old face was half abashed, kind and smiling. ‚ÄúYou know, last month I bought her a gold watch‚ÅÝ‚Äîsurprise fo‚Äô her birthday, de kind you hangs on a little pin on yo‚Äô waist. Lawd knows, I couldn‚Äôt ‚Äôford it‚ÅÝ‚Äîtook all de money from three week‚Äôs o‚Äô washin‚Äô, but I knowed she‚Äôd been wantin‚Äô a watch. An‚Äô this front room‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI moved ma bed out last year an‚Äô bought that new rug at de secondhand store an‚Äô them lace curtains so‚Äôs she could have a nice place to entertain her comp‚Äôny.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But de chile goes with such a kinder wild crowd o‚Äô young folks, Sister Whiteside! It worries me! The boys, they cusses, an‚Äô the girls, they paints, an‚Äô some of ‚Äôem live in de Bottoms. I been tried to get her out of it right along, but seems like I can‚Äôt. That‚Äôs why I‚Äôs glad she‚Äôs in de country fo‚Äô de summer an‚Äô comes in but only once a week, an‚Äô then she‚Äôs home with me. It‚Äôs too far to come in town at night, she say, so she gets her rest now, goin‚Äô to bed early an‚Äô all, with de country air round her. I hopes she calms down from runnin‚Äô round when she comes back here to stay in de fall.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ She‚Äôs a good chile. She don‚Äôt lie to me ‚Äôbout where she goes, nor nothin‚Äô like that, but she‚Äôs just wild, that‚Äôs all, just wild.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs she a Christian, Sister Williams?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, she ain‚Äôt. I‚Äôs sorry to say it of a chile o‚Äô mine, but she ain‚Äôt. She‚Äôs been on de moaner‚Äôs bench time after time, Sunday mawnin‚Äôs an‚Äô prayer-meetin‚Äô evenin‚Äôs, but she never would rise. I prays for her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, when she takes Jesus, she‚Äôll see de light! That‚Äôs what de matter with her, Sister Williams, she ain‚Äôt felt Him yit. Make her go to church when she comes back here.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I reckon you heard ‚Äôbout when de big revival‚Äôs due to come off this year, ain‚Äôt you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I ain‚Äôt, not yet.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGreat colored tent-meetin‚Äô with de Battle-Ax of de Lawd, Reverend Braswell preachin‚Äô! Yes, sir! Gwine start August eighteenth in de Hickory Woods yonder by de edge o‚Äô town.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood news,‚Äù cried Hager. ‚ÄúMo‚Äô sinners than enough‚Äôs in need o‚Äô savin‚Äô. I‚Äôs gwine to take Sandy an‚Äô get him started right with de Lawd. An‚Äô if that onery Jimboy‚Äôs back here, I gwine make him go, too, an‚Äô look Jesus in de face. Annjee an‚Äô me‚Äôs saved, chile!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You, Sandy, bring us some drinkin‚Äô water from de pump.‚Äù Aunt Hager rapped on the window with her knuckles to the boy playing outside. ‚ÄúAn‚Äô stop wrastlin‚Äô with that gal.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sandy rose triumphant from the prone body of black little Willie-Mae, lying squalling on the cinderpath near the back gate. ‚ÄúShe started it,‚Äù he yelled, running towards the pump. The girl began a reply, but at that moment a rickety wagon drawn by a white mule and driven by a grey-haired, leather-colored old man came rattling down the alley.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHy, there, Hager!‚Äù called an old Negro, tightening his reins on the mule, which immediately began to eat corn-tops over the back fence. ‚ÄúHow you been treatin‚Äô yo‚Äôself?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúRight tolable,‚Äù cried Hager, for she and Sister Whiteside had both emerged from the kitchen and were approaching the driver. ‚ÄúHow you doin‚Äô, Brother Logan?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, if here ain‚Äôt Sis‚Äô Whiteside, too!‚Äù said the old beau, sitting up straight on his wagon-seat and showing a row of ivory teeth in a wide grin. ‚ÄúI‚Äôs doin‚Äô purty well for a po‚Äô widower what ain‚Äôt got nobody to bake his bread. Doin‚Äô purty well. Hee! Hee! None o‚Äô you-all ain‚Äôt sorry for me, is you? How de storm treat you, Hager?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Says it carried off yo‚Äô porch?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ That‚Äôs certainly too bad! Well, it did some o‚Äô these white folks worse‚Äôn that. I got ‚Äônough work to do to last me de next fo‚Äô weeks, cleanin‚Äô up yards an‚Äô haulin‚Äô off trash, me an‚Äô dis mule here.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ How‚Äôs yo‚Äô chillen, Sis‚Äô Williams?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, they all right, thank yuh. Annjee‚Äôs still at Mis‚Äô Rice‚Äôs, an‚Äô Harriet‚Äôs in de country at de club.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs she?‚Äù said Brother Logan. ‚ÄúI seed her in town night ‚Äôfore last down on Pearl Street ‚Äôbout ten o‚Äôclock.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou ain‚Äôt seed Harriett no night ‚Äôfore last,‚Äù disputed Hager vigorously. ‚ÄúShe don‚Äôt come in town ‚Äôceptin‚Äô Thursday aftenoons, an‚Äô that‚Äôs tomorrow.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSister, I ain‚Äôt blind,‚Äù said the old man, hurt that his truth should be doubted. ‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚Äîseen‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHarriett Williams on Pearl Street‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ with Maudel Smothers an‚Äô two boys ‚Äôbout ten o‚Äôclock day before yestidy night! An‚Äô they was gwine to de Waiters‚Äô Ball, ‚Äôcause I asked Maudel where they was gwine, an‚Äô she say so. Then I says to Harriett: ‚ÄòDoes yo‚Äô mammy know you‚Äôs out this late?‚Äô an‚Äô she laughed an‚Äô say: ‚ÄòOh, that‚Äôs all right!‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Don‚Äôt tell me I ain‚Äôt seen Harriett, Hager.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, Lawd help!‚Äù Aunt Hager cried, her mouth open. ‚ÄúYou done seed my chile in town an‚Äô she ain‚Äôt come anear home! Stayed all night at Maudel‚Äôs, I reckon.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I tells her ‚Äôbout runnin‚Äô with that gal from de Bottoms. That‚Äôs what makes her lie to me‚ÅÝ‚Äîtellin‚Äô me she don‚Äôt come in town o‚Äô nights. Maudel‚Äôs folks don‚Äôt keep no kind o‚Äô house, and mens goes there, an‚Äô they sells licker, an‚Äô they gambles an‚Äô fights.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Is you sho that‚Äôs right, Brother Logan, ma chile done been in town an‚Äô ain‚Äôt come home?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt ain‚Äôt wrong!‚Äù said old man Logan, cracking his long whip on the white mule‚Äôs haunches. ‚ÄúGittiyap! You ole jinny!‚Äù and he drove off.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúUm-uh!‚Äù said Sister Whiteside to Hager as the two toil-worn old women walked towards the house. ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs de way they does you!‚Äù The peddler gathered up her things. ‚ÄúI better be movin‚Äô, ‚Äôcause I got these greens to sell yit, an‚Äô it‚Äôs gittin‚Äô ‚Äôlong towards evenin‚Äô.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ That‚Äôs de way chillens does you, Sister Williams! I knows! That‚Äôs de way they does!‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
