<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<div>
				<h1 id="chap12">CHAPTER XII</h1>
			</div>
			<h3>Hard Winter</h3>
			<p>September passed and the corn-stalks in the garden were cut. There were no more apples left on the trees, and chilly rains came to beat down the falling leaves from the maples and the elms. Cold and drearily wet October passed, too, with no hint of Indian summer or golden forests. And as yet there was no word from the departed Jimboy. Annjee worried herself sick, as usual, hoping every day that a letter would come from this wandering husband whom she loved. And each night she hurried home from Mrs.¬ÝRice‚Äôs, looked on the parlor table for the mail, and found none. Harriett had not written, either, since she went away with the carnival, and Hager never mentioned her youngest daughter‚Äôs name. Nor did Hager mention Jimboy except when Annjee asked her, after she could hold it no longer: ‚ÄúAre you sure the mail-man ain‚Äôt left me a letter today?‚Äù And then Aunt Hager would reply impatiently: ‚ÄúYou think I‚Äôd a et it if he did? You know that good-for-nothin‚Äô, upsettin‚Äô scoundrel ain‚Äôt wrote!‚Äù</p>
			<p>But in spite of daily disappointments from the postal service Annjee continued to rush from Mrs.¬ÝRice‚Äôs hot kitchen as soon after dinner as she could and to trudge through the chill October rains, anxious to feel in the mail-box outside her door, then hope against hope for a letter inside on the little front-room table‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhich would always be empty. She caught a terrible cold tramping through the damp streets, forgetting to button her cloak, then sitting down with her wet shoes on when she got home, a look of dumb disappointment in her eyes, too tired and unhappy to remove her clothes.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôs a fool,‚Äù said her mother, whose tongue was often much sharper than the meaning behind it. ‚ÄúMooning after a worthless nigger like Jimboy. I tole you years ago he was no good, when he first come, lookin‚Äô like he ought to be wearin‚Äô short pants, an‚Äô out here courtin‚Äô you. Ain‚Äôt none o‚Äô them bell-hoppin‚Äô, racehoss-followin‚Äô kind o‚Äô darkies worth havin‚Äô, an‚Äô that‚Äôs all Jimboy was when you married him an‚Äô he ain‚Äôt much mo‚Äôn that now. An‚Äô you older‚Äôn he is, too!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut you know why I married, don‚Äôt you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou, Sandy, go outdoors an‚Äô get me some wood fo‚Äô this stove.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Yes, I knows why, because he were de father o‚Äô that chile you was ‚Äôbout to bring here, but I don‚Äôt see why it couldn‚Äôt just well been some o‚Äô these steady, hard-workin‚Äô Stanton young men‚Äôs what was courtin‚Äô you at de same time.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But, chile or no chile, I couldn‚Äôt hear nothin‚Äô but Jimboy, Jimboy, Jimboy! I told you you better stay in de high school an‚Äô get your edication, but no, you had to marry this Jimboy. Now you see what you got, don‚Äôt you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, he ain‚Äôt been so bad, ma! And I don‚Äôt care, I love him!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúUmn-huh! Try an‚Äô live on love, daughter! Just try an‚Äô live on love.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You‚Äôs made a mistake, that‚Äôs all, honey.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But I guess there ain‚Äôt no use talkin‚Äô ‚Äôbout it now. Take off yo‚Äô wet shoes ‚Äôfore you catch yo‚Äô death o‚Äô cold!‚Äù</p>
			<p>On Thanksgiving at Mrs.¬ÝRice‚Äôs, so Annjee reported, they had turkey with chestnut dressing; but at Aunt Hager‚Äôs she and Sandy had a nice juicy possum, a present from old man Logan, parboiled and baked sweet and brown with yams in the pan. Aunt Hager opened a jar of peach preserves. And she told Sandy to ask Jimmy Lane in to dinner because, since his mother died, he wasn‚Äôt faring so well and the people he was staying with didn‚Äôt care much about him. But since Jimmy had quit school, Sandy didn‚Äôt see him often; and the day before Thanksgiving he couldn‚Äôt find him at all, so they had no company to help them eat the possum.</p>
			<p>The week after Thanksgiving Annjee fell ill and had to go to bed. She had the grippe, Aunt Hager said, and she began to dose her with quinine and to put hot mustard-plasters on her back and gave her onion syrup to drink, but it didn‚Äôt seem to do much good, and finally she had to send Sandy for Dr.¬ÝMcDillors.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSystem‚Äôs all run down,‚Äù said the doctor. ‚ÄúHeavy cold on the chest‚ÅÝ‚Äîbetter be careful. And stay in the bed!‚Äù But the warning was unnecessary. Annjee felt too tired and weak ever to rise, and only the mail-man‚Äôs whistle blowing at somebody else‚Äôs house would cause her to try to lift her head. Then she would demand weakly: ‚ÄúDid he stop here?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Hager‚Äôs home now was like a steam laundry. The kitchen was always hung with lines of clothes to dry, and in the late afternoon and evenings the ironing-board was spread from the table to a chair-back in the middle of the floor. All of the old customers were sending their clothes to Hager again during the winter. And since Annjee was sick, bringing no money into the house on Saturdays, the old woman had even taken an extra washing to do. Being the only wage-earner, Hager kept the suds flying‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut with the wet weather she had to dry the clothes in the kitchen most of the time, and when Sandy came home from school for lunch, he would eat under dripping lines of white folks‚Äô garments while he listened to his mother coughing in the next room.</p>
			<p>In the other rooms of the house there were no stoves, so the doors were kept open in order that the heat might pass through from the kitchen. They couldn‚Äôt afford to keep more than one fire going; therefore the kitchen was living-room, dining-room, and work-room combined. In the mornings Sandy would jump out of bed and run with his clothes in his hands to the kitchen-stove, where his grandmother would have the fire blazing, the coffee-pot on, and a great tub of water heating for the washings. And in the evenings after supper he would open his geography and read about the strange countries far away, the book spread out on the oilcloth-covered kitchen-table. And Aunt Hager, if her ironing was done, would sit beside the stove and doze, while Annjee tossed and groaned in her chilly bedroom. Only in the kitchen was it really bright and warm.</p>
			<p>In the afternoons when Sandy came home from school he would usually find Sister Johnson helping Hager with her ironing, and keeping up a steady conversation.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDis gonna be a hard winter. De papers say folks is out o‚Äô work ever‚Äôwhere, an‚Äô, wid all dis sleet an‚Äô rain, it‚Äôs a terror fo‚Äô de po‚Äô peoples, I tells you! Now, ma Tom, he got a good job tendin‚Äô de furnace at de Fair Buildin‚Äô, so I ain‚Äôt doin‚Äô much washin‚Äô long as he‚Äôs workin‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut so many colored men‚Äôs out o‚Äô work here, wid Christmas comin‚Äô, it sho‚Äô is too bad! An‚Äô you, Sis Williams, wid yo‚Äô daughter sick in bed! Any time yo‚Äô clothes git kinder heavy fo‚Äô you, I ain‚Äôt mind helpin‚Äô you out. Jest send dis chile atter me or holler ‚Äôcross de yard if you kin made me hear!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ How you press dis dress, wid de collar turn up or down? Which way do Mis‚Äô Dunset like it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI always presses it down,‚Äù returned Hager, who was ironing handkerchiefs and towels on the table. ‚ÄúBetter let me iron that, an‚Äô you take these here towels.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll right,‚Äù agreed Sister Johnson, ‚Äú‚Ää‚Äôcause you knows how yo‚Äô white folks likes dey things, an‚Äô I don‚Äôt. Folks have so many different ways!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSho do,‚Äù said Hager. ‚ÄúI washed for a woman once what even had her sheets starched.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut you‚Äôs sure got a fine repertation as a washer, Sis Williams. One o‚Äô de white ladies what I washes fo‚Äô say you washes beautiful.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI reckon white folks does think right smart of me,‚Äù said Hager proudly. ‚ÄúThey always likes you when you tries to do right.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhen you tries to do yo‚Äô work right, you means. Dey ain‚Äôt carin‚Äô nothin‚Äô ‚Äôbout you ‚Äôyond workin‚Äô fo‚Äô ‚Äôem. Ain‚Äôt dey got all de little niggers settin‚Äô off in one row at dat school whar Sandy an‚Äô Willie-Mae go at? I‚Äôs like Harriett‚ÅÝ‚Äîain‚Äôt got no time fo‚Äô white folks maself, ‚Äôceptin‚Äô what little money dey pays me. You ain‚Äôt been run out o‚Äô yo‚Äô home like I is, Hager.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Sandy, make haste, go fetch my pipe from over to de house, an‚Äô don‚Äôt stay all day playin‚Äô wid Willie-Mae! Tote it here quick!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ An‚Äô you oughter hear de way white folks talks ‚Äôbout niggers. Says dey‚Äôs lazy, an‚Äô says dey stinks, an‚Äô all. Huh! Dey ought to smell dey-selves! You‚Äôs smelled white peoples when dey gets to sweatin‚Äô ain‚Äôt you? Smells jest like sour cream, only worser, kinder sickenin‚Äô like. And some o‚Äô dese foriners what‚Äôs been eating garlic‚ÅÝ‚Äîphew! Lawdy!‚Äù</p>
			<p>When Sandy returned with the pipe, the conversation had shifted to the deaths in the colored community. ‚ÄúHager, folks dyin‚Äô right an‚Äô left already dis winter. We‚Äôs had such a bad fall, dat‚Äôs de reason why. You know dat no-‚Äôcount Jack Smears passed away last Sunday. Dey had his funeral yesterday an‚Äô I went. Good thing he belonged to de lodge, too, else he‚Äôd been buried in de po‚Äô-field, ‚Äôcause he ain‚Äôt left even de copper cents to put on his eyes. Lodge beared his funeral bill, but I heard more‚Äôn one member talkin‚Äô ‚Äôbout how dey was puttin‚Äô a ten-dollar nigger in a hundred-dollar coffin!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ An‚Äô his wife were at de funeral. Yes, sir! A hussy! After she done left him last year wid de little chillens to take care of an‚Äô she runnin‚Äô round de streets showin‚Äô off. Dere she sot, big as life, in front wid de moaners, long black veil on her face and done dyed her coat black, an‚Äô all de time Reverend Butler been preachin‚Äô ‚Äôbout how holy Jack were, she turn an‚Äô twist an‚Äô she coughed an‚Äô she whiffled an‚Äô blowed an‚Äô she wiped‚ÅÝ‚Äîtryin‚Äô her best to cry an‚Äô couldn‚Äôt, deceitful as she is! Then she jest broke out to screamin‚Äô, but warn‚Äôt a tear in her eye; makin‚Äô folks look at her, dat‚Äôs all, ‚Äôcause she ain‚Äôt cared nothin‚Äô ‚Äôbout Jack. She been livin‚Äô in de Bottoms since last Feb‚Äôary wid a young bell-hop ain‚Äôt much older‚Äôn her own son, Bert!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo Jesus!‚Äù said Hager. ‚ÄúSome womens is awful.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWorse‚Äôn dat,‚Äù said Sister Johnson.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúLawdy! Listen at dat sleet beatin‚Äô on dese winders! Sho gwine be a real winter! An‚Äô how time do pass. Ain‚Äôt but t‚Äôree mo‚Äô weeks till Christmas!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTruth!‚Äù said Sandy‚Äôs grandmother. ‚ÄúAn‚Äô we ain‚Äôt gwine have no money a-tall. Ain‚Äôt no mo‚Äôn got through payin‚Äô ma taxes good, an‚Äô de interest on ma mortgage, when Annjee get sick here! Lawd, I tells you, po‚Äô colored womens have it hard!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSho do!‚Äù said Sister Johnson, sucking at her pipe as she ironed. ‚ÄúHow long you been had this house, Sis Williams?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFo‚Äô nigh on forty years, ever sence Cudge an‚Äô me come here from Montgomery. An‚Äô I been washin‚Äô fo‚Äô white folks ever‚Äô week de Lawd sent sence I been here, too. Bought this house washin‚Äô, and made as many payments myself as Cudge come near; an‚Äô raised ma chillens washin‚Äô; an‚Äô when Cudge taken sick an‚Äô laid on his back for mo‚Äôn a year, I taken care o‚Äô him washin‚Äô; an‚Äô when he died, paid de funeral bill washin‚Äô, ‚Äôcause he ain‚Äôt belonged to no lodge. Sent Tempy through de high school and edicated Annjee till she marry that onery pup of a Jimboy, an‚Äô Harriett till she left home. Yes, sir. Washin‚Äô, an‚Äô here I is with me arms still in de tub!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But they‚Äôs one mo‚Äô got to go through school yet, an‚Äô that‚Äôs ma little Sandy. If de Lawd lets me live, I‚Äôs gwine make a edicated man out o‚Äô him. He‚Äôs gwine be another Booker T. Washington.‚Äù Hager turned a voluminous white petticoat on the ironing-board as she carefully pressed its embroidered hem. ‚ÄúI ain‚Äôt never raised no boy o‚Äô ma own yet, so I wants this one o‚Äô Annjee‚Äôs to ‚Äômount to something. I wants him to know all they is to know, so‚Äôs he can help this black race o‚Äô our‚Äôn to come up and see de light and take they places in de world. I wants him to be a Fred Douglass leadin‚Äô de people, that‚Äôs what, an‚Äô not followin‚Äô in de tracks o‚Äô his good-for-nothin‚Äô pappy, worthless an‚Äô wanderin‚Äô like Jimboy is.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO, don‚Äôt say that, ma,‚Äù Annjee cried weakly from her bed in the other room. ‚ÄúJimboy‚Äôs all right, but he‚Äôs just too smart to do this heavy ditch-digging labor, and that‚Äôs all white folks gives the colored a chance at here in Stanton; so he had to leave.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere you go excitin‚Äô yo‚Äôself agin, an‚Äô you sick. I thought you was asleep. I ain‚Äôt meant nothin‚Äô, honey. Course he‚Äôs all right,‚Äù Hager said to quiet her daughter, but she couldn‚Äôt resist mumbling: ‚ÄúBut I ain‚Äôt seen him doin‚Äô you no good.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, he ain‚Äôt beat her, has he?‚Äù asked Sister Johnson, who, for the sake of conversation, often took a contrary view-point. ‚ÄúI‚Äôs knowed many a man to beat his wife. Tom used to tap me a few times ‚Äôfo‚Äô I found out a way to stop him, but dat ain‚Äôt nedder here nor dere!‚Äù She folded a towel decisively and gave it a vigorous rub with the hot iron. ‚ÄúDid I ever tell you ‚Äôbout de man lived next do‚Äô to us in Cairo what cut his wife in de stomach wid a razor an‚Äô den stood ovah her when de doctor was sewin‚Äô her up moanin‚Äô: ‚ÄòI don‚Äôt see why I cut her in de stomach! O, Lawd! She always told me she ain‚Äôt want to be cut in de stomach!‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ An‚Äô it warn‚Äôt two months atter dat dat he done sliced her in de stomach agin when she was tryin‚Äô to git away from him! He were a mean nigger, that man were!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnnjee, is you taken yo‚Äô medicine yet? It‚Äôs past fo‚Äô o‚Äôclock,‚Äù Hager called. ‚ÄúSandy, here, take this fifteen cents, chile, and run to de store an‚Äô get me a soup bone. I gwine try an‚Äô make a little broth for yo‚Äô mother. An‚Äô don‚Äôt be gone all day neither, ‚Äôcause I got to send these clothes back to Mis‚Äô Dunset.‚Äù Hager was pressing out the stockings as she turned her attention to the conversation again. ‚ÄúThey tells me, Sister Johnson, that Seth Jones done beat up his wife something terrible.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe did, an‚Äô he oughter! She was always stayin‚Äô way from home an‚Äô settin‚Äô up in de church, not even cookin‚Äô his meals, an‚Äô de chillens runnin‚Äô ragged in de street.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs a religious frantic, ain‚Äôt she?‚Äù asked Hager.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúYou Sandy, hurry up, sir! an‚Äô go get that soup bone!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, chile, ‚Äôtain‚Äôt that,‚Äù said Sister Johnson. ‚ÄúShe ain‚Äôt carin‚Äô so much ‚Äôbout religion. It‚Äôs Reverend Butler she‚Äôs runnin‚Äô atter. Ever‚Äô time de church do‚Äô opens, there she sets in de preacher‚Äôs mouth, tryin‚Äô to ‚Äôtract de shepherd from his sheep. She de one what taken her husband‚Äôs money an‚Äô bought Reverend Butler dat gold-headed walkin‚Äô-cane he‚Äôs got. I ain‚Äôt blame Seth fer hittin‚Äô her bap on de head, an‚Äô she takin‚Äô his money an‚Äô buyin‚Äô canes fer ministers!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSadie Butler‚Äôs in my school,‚Äù said Sandy, putting on his stocking cap. ‚ÄúReverend Butler‚Äôs her stepfather.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShut up! You hears too much,‚Äù said Hager. ‚ÄúAin‚Äôt I told you to go on an‚Äô get that soup bone?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes‚Äôm. I‚Äôm going.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAn‚Äô I reckon I‚Äôll be movin‚Äô too,‚Äù said Sister Johnson, placing the iron on the stove. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs near ‚Äôbout time to be startin‚Äô Tom‚Äôs supper. I done told Willie-Mae to peel de taters ‚Äôfo‚Äô I come ovah here, but I spects she ain‚Äôt done it. Dat‚Äôs de worse black gal to get to work! Soon as she eat, she run outdo‚Äôs to de privy to keep from washin‚Äô de dishes!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sandy started to the store, and Sister Johnson, with on old coat over her head, scooted across the back yard to her door. It was a chill December afternoon and the steady sleet stung Sandy in the face as he ran along, but the air smelled good after the muggy kitchen and the stale scent of Annjee‚Äôs sick-room. Near the corner Sandy met the mail-man, his face red with cold.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGot anything for us?‚Äù asked the little boy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù said the man as he went on without stopping.</p>
			<p>Sandy wished his mother would get well soon. She looked so sad lying there in bed. And Aunt Hager was always busy washing and ironing. His grandmother didn‚Äôt even have time to mend his stockings any more and there were great holes in the heels when he went to school. His shoes were worn out under the bottoms, too. Yesterday his mother had said: ‚ÄúHoney, you better take them high-brown shoes of mine from underneath the bed and put ‚Äôem on to keep your feet dry this wet weather. I can‚Äôt afford to buy you none now, and you ain‚Äôt got no rubbers.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou want me to wear old women‚Äôs shoes like Jimmy Lane?‚Äù Sandy objected. ‚ÄúI won‚Äôt catch cold with my feet wet.‚Äù</p>
			<p>But Hager from the kitchen overruled his objections. ‚ÄúPut on them shoes, sir, an‚Äô don‚Äôt argue with yo‚Äô mother, an‚Äô she sick in de bed! Put ‚Äôem on an‚Äô hush yo‚Äô mouth, till you get something better.‚Äù</p>
			<p>So this morning at recess Sandy had to fight a boy for calling him ‚Äúsissy‚Äù on account of his mother‚Äôs shoes he was wearing.</p>
			<p>But only a week and a half more and the Christmas vacation would come! Uptown the windows were already full of toys, dolls, skates, and sleds. Sandy wanted a Golden Flyer sled for Christmas. That‚Äôs all he wanted‚ÅÝ‚Äîa Golden Flyer with flexible rudders, so you could guide it easy. Boy! Wouldn‚Äôt he come shooting down that hill by the Hickory Woods where the fellows coasted every year! They cost only four dollars and ninety-five cents and surely his grandma could afford that for him, even if his mother was sick and she had just paid her taxes. Four ninety-five‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut he wouldn‚Äôt want anything else if Aunt Hager would buy that sled for Santa Claus to bring him! Every day, after school, he passed by the store, where many sleds were displayed, and stood for a long time looking at this Golden Flyer of narrow hard-wood timbers varnished a shiny yellow. It had bright red runners and a beautiful bar with which to steer.</p>
			<p>When he told Aunt Hager about it, all she said was: ‚ÄúBoy, is you crazy?‚Äù But Annjee smiled from her bed and answered: ‚ÄúWait and see.‚Äù Maybe they would get it for him‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut Santa Claus was mean to poor kids sometimes, Sandy knew, when their parents had no money.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFifteen cents‚Äô worth of hamburger,‚Äù he said absentmindedly to the butcher when he reached the market.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And when Sandy came home his grandmother whipped him for bringing ground meat instead of the soup bone for which she had sent him.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>So the cold days passed, heavy and cloudy, with Annjee still in bed, and the kitchen full of garments hanging on lines to dry because, out of doors, the frozen rain kept falling. Always in Hager‚Äôs room a great pile of rough-dried clothes eternally waited to be ironed. Sandy helped his grandmother as much as he could, running errands, bringing in coal and wood, pumping water in the mornings before school, and sitting by his mother in the evenings, reading to her from his <i>Nature Story Reader</i> when it wasn‚Äôt too cold in her bedroom.</p>
			<p>Annjee was able to sit up now and she said she felt better, but she looked ashen and tired. She wanted to get back to work, so she would have a little money for Christmas and be able to help Hager with the doctor‚Äôs bill, but she guessed she couldn‚Äôt. And she was still worrying about Jimboy. Three months had passed since he went away‚ÅÝ‚Äîa longer time than usual that he hadn‚Äôt written. Maybe something <em>had</em> happened to him. Maybe he was out of work and hungry, because this was a hard winter. <em>Maybe he was dead!</em></p>
			<p>‚ÄúO, my God, no!‚Äù Annjee cried as the thought struck her.</p>
			<p>But one Sunday morning, ten days before Christmas, the door-bell rang violently and a special-delivery boy stood on the front porch. Annjee‚Äôs heart jumped as she sat up in bed. She had seen the youngster approaching from the window. Word from Jimboy surely‚ÅÝ‚Äîor word about him!</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMa! Sandy! Go quick and see what it is!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLetter for Mrs.¬ÝAnnjelica Rodgers,‚Äù said the boy, stamping the snow from his feet. ‚ÄúSign here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>While Sandy held the door open, letting the cold wind blow through the house, Hager haltingly scrawled something on the boy‚Äôs pink pad. Then, with the child behind her, the old woman hurried to her daughter‚Äôs bed with the white envelope.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs from him!‚Äù Annjee cried; ‚ÄúI know it‚Äôs from Jimboy,‚Äù as she tore open the letter with trembling fingers.</p>
			<p>A scrap of dirty tablet-paper fell on the quilt, and Annjee quickly picked it up. It was written in pencil in a feminine hand.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Sister,</p>
				<p>I am stranded in Memphis, Tenn, and the show has gone on to New Orleans. I can‚Äôt buy anything to eat because I am broke and don‚Äôt know anybody in this town. Annjee, please send me my fare to come home and mail it to the Beale Street Colored Hotel. I‚Äôm sending my love to you and mama.</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p>
						<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your baby sister,</span>
						<br/>
						<b epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Harriett</b>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
