<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<div><h1 id='chap15'>CHAPTER XV</h1></div>

<h3>One by One</h3>

<p class='pindent'>You could smell the spring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tain’t gwine be warm fo’ weeks yet!” Hager said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nevertheless, you could smell the spring. Little boys
were already running in the streets without their overcoats,
and the ground-hog had seen its shadow. Snow remained in
the fence corners, but it had melted on the roofs. The yards
were wet and muddy, but no longer white.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a sunny afternoon in late March that a letter came.
On his last delivery the mail-man stopped, dropped it in the
box—and Sandy saw him. It was addressed to his mother
and he knew it must be from Jimboy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go on an’ take it to her,” his grandma said, as soon as she
saw the boy coming with it in his hand. “I knows that’s what
you want to do. Go on an’ take it.” And she bent over her
ironing again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy ran almost all the way to Mrs. Rice’s, dropping the
letter more than once on the muddy sidewalk, so excited he
did not think to put it in his pocket. Into the big yard and
around to the white lady’s back door he sped—and it was
locked! He knocked loudly for a long time, and finally an
upper window opened and Annjee, a dust-rag around her
head, looked down, squinting in the sunlight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who’s there?” she called stridently, thinking of some
peddler or belated tradesman for whom she did not wish to
stop her cleaning.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy pantingly held up the letter and was about to say
something when the window closed with a bang. He could
hear his mother almost falling down the back stairs, she was
coming so fast. Then the key turned swiftly in the lock, the
door opened, and, without closing it, Annjee took the letter
from him and tore it open where she stood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s from Jimboy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy stood on the steps looking at his mother, her bosom
heaving, her sleeves rolled up, and the white cloth tied
about her head, doubly white against her dark-brown face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s in Detroit, it says.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Umn! I ain’t never seen him
write such a long letter. ‘I had a hard time this winter till I
landed here,’ it says, ‘but things look pretty good now, and
there is lots of building going on and plenty of work opening
up in the automobile plants .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a mighty lot of colored
folks here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hope you and Sandy been well. Sorry couldn’t
send you nothing Xmas, but I was in St. Paul broke.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Kiss
my son for me.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Tell ma hello even if she don’t want to
hear it. Your loving husband, Jimboy Rodgers.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annjee did her best to hold the letter with one hand and
pick up Sandy with the other, but he had grown considerably
during the winter and she was still a little weak from
her illness; so she bent down to his level and kissed him several
times before she re-read the letter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“From your daddy!” she said. “Umn-mn.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Come on in
here and warm yourself. Lemme see what he says
again!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She lighted the gas oven in the white kitchen
and sat down in front of it with her letter, forgetting the
clock and the approaching time for Mrs. Rice’s dinner, forgetting
everything. “A letter from my daddy! From my far-off
sugar-daddy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“From <span class='it'>my</span> daddy,” corrected Sandy.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Say, gimme a
nickel to buy some marbles, mama. I wanta go play.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Without taking her eyes from the precious note Annjee
fumbled in her apron and found a coin. “Take it and go on!”
she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a dime. Sandy skipped around the house and down
the street in the chilly sunshine. He decided to stop at
Buster’s for a while before going home, since he had to pass
there anyway, and he found his friend in the house trying to
carve boats from clothes-pins with a rusty jack-knife.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Buster’s mother was a seamstress, and, after opening the
front door and greeting Sandy with a cheery “Hello,” she
returned to her machine and a friend who was calling on
her. She was a tall young light-mulatto woman, with skin
like old ivory. Maybe that was why Buster was so white. But
her husband was a black man who worked on the city’s
garbage-trucks and was active politically when election
time came, getting colored men to vote Republican. Everybody
said he made lots of money, but that he wasn’t really
Buster’s father.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The golden-haired child gave Sandy a butcher-knife and
together they whacked at the clothes-pins. You could hear
the two women talking plainly in the little sewing-room,
where the machine ran between snatches of conversation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes,” Buster’s mother was saying, “I have the hardest
time keeping that boy colored! He goes on just like he was
white. Do you know what he did last week? Cut all the blossoms
off my geranium plants here in the house, took them
to school, and gave them to Dorothy Marlow, in his grade.
And you know who Dorothy is, don’t you? Senator Marlow’s daughter!
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I said: ‘Buster, if you ever cut my flowers
to carry to any little girl again, I’ll punish you severely, but
if you cut them to carry to little white girls, I don’t know
what I’ll do with you.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Don’t you know they hang colored
boys for things like that?’ I wanted to scare him—because
you know there might be trouble even among kids in
school over such things.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I had to laugh.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her friend laughed too. “He’s a hot one, taking flowers to
the women already, and a white girl at that! You’ve got a
fast-working son, Elvira, I must say.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But, do you know,
when you first moved here and I saw you and the boy going
in and out, I thought sure you were both white folks. I didn’t
know you was colored till my husband said: ‘That’s Eddie’s
wife!’ You-all sure looked white to me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The machine started to whir, making the conversation
inaudible for a few minutes, and when Sandy caught their
words again, they were talking about the Elks’ club-house
that the colored people were planning to build.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can you go out?” Sandy demanded of Buster, sure they
were making no headway with the tough clothes-pins and
dull knives.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Maybe,” said Buster. “I’ll go see.” And he went into the
other room and asked his mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Put on your overcoat,” she commanded. “It’s not summer yet.
And be back in here before dark.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, Vira,” the child said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two children went to Mrs. Rumford’s shop on the
corner and bought three cents’ worth of candy and seven
cents’ worth of peewees with which to play marbles when it
got warm. Then Sandy walked back past Buster’s house with
him and they played for a while in the street before Sandy
turned to run home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aunt Hager was making mush for supper. She sent him to
the store for a pint bottle of milk as soon as he arrived, but
he forgot to take the bottle and had to come back for it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’d forget yo’ head if it wasn’t tied to you!” the old
woman reminded him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were just finishing supper when Annjee got home
with two chocolate eclairs in her coat-pocket, mashed together
against Jimboy’s letter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Huh! I’m crazy!” she said, running her hand down into
the sticky mess. “But listen, ma! He’s got a job and is doing
well in Detroit, Jimboy says.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And I’m going to him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You what?” Hager gasped, dropping her spoon in her
mush-bowl. “What you sayin’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I said I’m going to him, ma! I got to!” Annjee stood with
her coat and hat still on, holding the sticky letter. “I’m going
where my heart is, ma! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Oh, not today.” She put her
arms around her mother’s neck. “I don’t mean today, mama,
nor next week. I got to save some money first. I only got a
little now. But I mean I’m going to him soon’s I can. I can’t
help it, ma—I love him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lawd, is you foolish!” cried Hager. “What’s you gwine
do with this chile, trapesin’ round after Jimboy? What you
gwine do if he leaves you in Detroiter or wherever he are?
What you gwine do then? You loves him! Huh!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But he ain’t gonna leave me in Detroit, ’cause I’m going
with him everywhere he goes,” she said, her eyes shining.
“He ain’t gonna leave me no more!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An’ Sandy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Couldn’t he stay with you, mama? And then maybe we’d
come back here and live, Jimboy and me, some time, when
we get a little money ahead, and could pay off the mortgage
on the house.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But there ain’t no use arguing, mama, I
got to go!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager had never seen Annjee so positive before; she sat
speechless, looking at the bowl of mush.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I got to go where it ain’t lonesome and where I ain’t unhappy—and
that’s where Jimboy is! I got to go soon as I
can.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hager rose to put some water on the stove to heat for the
dishes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One by one you leaves me—Tempy, then Harriett, then
you,” she said. “But Sandy’s gonna stick by me, ain’t you,
son? He ain’t gwine leave his grandma.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The youngster looked at Hager, moving slowly about the
kitchen putting away the supper things.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And I’s gwine to make a fine man out o’ you, Sandy. I’s
gwine raise one chile right yet, if de Lawd lets me live—just
one chile right!” she murmured.</p>

<hr class='tbk'/>

<p class='pindent'>That night the March wind began to blow and the window-panes
rattled. Sandy woke up in the dark, lying close
and warm beside his mother. When he went back to sleep
again, he dreamed that his Aunt Tempy’s Christmas book
had been turned into a chariot, and that he was riding
through the sky with Tempy standing very dignifiedly beside
him as he drove. And he couldn’t see anybody down on
earth, not even Hager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When his mother rolled out at six o’clock to go to work,
he woke up again, and while she dressed, he lay watching his
breath curl mistily upwards in the cold room. Outside the
window it was bleak and grey and the March wind, humming
through the leafless branches of the trees, blew terrifically.
He heard Aunt Hager in the kitchen poking at the
stove, making up a blaze to start the coffee boiling. Then
the front door closed when his mother went out and, as the
door slammed, the wind howled fiercely. It was nice and
warm in bed, so he lay under the heavy quilts half dreaming,
half thinking, until his grandmother shook him to get up.
And many were the queer, dream-drowsy thoughts that
floated through his mind—not only that morning, but almost
every morning while he lay beneath the warm quilts
until Hager had called him three or four times to get ready
for school.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He wondered sometimes whether if he washed and
washed his face and hands, he would ever be white. Someone
had told him once that blackness was only skin-deep.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And would he ever have a big house with electric
lights in it, like his Aunt Tempy—but it was mostly white
people who had such fine things, and they were mean to
colored.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Some white folks were nice, though. Earl was
nice at school, but not the little boys across the street, who
called him “nigger” every day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and not Mrs. Rice, who
scolded his mother.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Aunt Harrie didn’t like any white
folks at all.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But Jesus was white and wore a long, white
robe, like a woman’s, on the Sunday-school cards.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Once
Jimmy Lane said: “God damn Jesus” when the teacher
scolded him for not knowing his Bible lesson. He said it out
loud in church, too, and the church didn’t fall down on him,
as Sandy thought it might.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Grandma said it was a sin to
cuss and swear, but all the fellows at school swore—and Jimboy
did, too. But every time Sandy said “God damn,” he felt
bad, because Aunt Hager said God was mighty good and it
was wrong to take His name in vain. But he would like to
learn to say “God damn” without feeling anything like most
boys said it—just “God damn! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God damn! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God
damn!” without being ashamed of himself.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The Lord
never seemed to notice, anyhow.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And when he got big,
he wanted to travel like Jimboy. He wanted to be a railroad
engineer, but Harriett had said there weren’t any colored
engineers on trains.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What would he be, then? Maybe a
doctor; but it was more fun being an engineer and travelling
far away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Sandy wished Annjee would take him with her when she
went to join Jimboy—but then Aunt Hager would be all by
herself, and grandma was so nice to him he would hate to
leave her alone. Who would cut wood for her then? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But
when he got big, he would go to Detroit. And maybe New
York, too, where his geography said they had the tallest
buildings in the world, and trains that ran under the
river.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He wondered if there were any colored people in
New York.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. How ugly African colored folks looked in the
geography—with bushy heads and wild eyes! Aunt Hager
said her mother was an African, but she wasn’t ugly and wild;
neither was Aunt Hager; neither was little dark Willie-Mae,
and they were all black like Africans.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And Reverend
Braswell was as black as ink, but he knew God.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God
didn’t care if people were black, did He? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What was God?
Was He a man or a lamb or what? Buster’s mother said God
was a light, but Aunt Hager said He was a King and had a
throne and wore a crown—she intended to sit down by His
side by and by.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Was Buster’s father white? Buster was
white and colored both. But he didn’t look like he was colored.
What made Buster not colored? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And what made
girls different from boys? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Once when they were playing
house, Willie-Mae told him how girls were different from
boys, but they didn’t know why. Now Willie-Mae was in the
seventh grade and had hard little breasts that stuck out
sharp-like, and Jimmy Lane said dirty things about Willie-Mae.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Once he asked his mother what his navel was for
and she said, “Layovers to catch meddlers.” What did that
mean? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And how come ladies got sick and stayed in bed
when they had babies? Where did babies come from, anyhow?
Not from storks—a fairy-story like Santa Claus.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Did God love people who told fairy-stories and lied to kids
about storks and Santa Claus? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Santa Claus was no good,
anyhow! God damn Santa Claus for not bringing him the
sled he wanted Christmas! It was all a lie about Santa Claus!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sound of Hager pouring coal on the fire and dragging
her wash-tubs across the kitchen floor to get ready for
work broke in on Sandy’s drowsy half-dreams, and as he
rolled over in bed, his grandmother, hearing the springs
creak, called loudly: “You Sandy! Get up from there! It’s
seven and past! You want to be late gettin’ to yo’ school?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m, I’m coming, grandma!” he said under the quilts.
“But it’s cold in here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You knows you don’t dress in yonder! Bring them
clothes on out behind this stove, sir.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes’m.” So with a kick of the feet his covers went flying
back and Sandy ran to the warmth of the little kitchen,
where he dressed, washed, and ate. Then he yelled for
Willie-Mae—when he felt like it—or else went on to school
without her, joining some of the boys on the way.</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:center;'>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</p>

<p class='pindent'>So spring was coming and Annjee worked diligently at
Mrs. Rice’s day after day. Often she did something extra for
Mrs. Rice’s sister and her children—pressed a shirtwaist or
ironed some stockings—and so added a few quarters or
maybe even a dollar to her weekly wages, all of which she
saved to help carry her to Jimboy in Detroit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For ten years she had been cooking, washing, ironing,
scrubbing—and for what? For only the few weeks in a year,
or a half-year, when Jimboy would come home from some
strange place and take her in his strong arms and kiss her
and murmur: “Annjee, baby!” That’s what she had been
working for—then the dreary months were as nothing, and
the hard years faded away. But now he had been gone all
winter, and, from his letter, he might not come back soon,
because he said Detroit was a fine place for colored
folks.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But Stanton—well, Annjee thought there must
surely be better towns, where a woman wouldn’t have to
work so hard to live.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And where Jimboy was.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So before the first buds opened on the apple-tree in the
back yard, Annjee had gone to Detroit, leaving Sandy behind
with his grandmother. And when the apple-blossoms
came in full bloom, there was no one living in the little
house but a grey-headed old woman and her grandchild.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One by one they leaves you,” Hager said slowly. “One by
one yo’ chillen goes.”</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
